To just go through some processes
and, um, catch up on some responses and things.
So we just thought we would pick off with, um, our first
submitter today, uh, the New Zealand Airports Association.
Uh, you are our very first submitter on, uh, these bills.
So welcome to the committee this morning.
You have, uh, 20 minutes with us.
Uh, so we'll hand over to you for your introductions
and opening remarks, but of course, members will be, uh,
eager to ask questions, I'm sure.
And we've got, um, we've got some members on Zoom and,
and some obviously in person here today.
So, over to you.
Thank you so much, chair. Thank you members.
It is an honor to kick this off.
It is a milestone, uh, process.
So it was, I was, I'm not sure if I should be chuffed
to be first, but let's see if we can set off, uh,
with some good content.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to be here.
I'm joined online by Lauren Ratley, uh,
a partner at Russell McBee in case there are technical
questions she may be better placed to respond to.
You are being asked to consider legislation
that will determine the design
of New Zealand's planning system for the next generation.
It is a significant responsibility
and it deserves the most rigorous engagement
this committee can give it.
It was important to me that NZ Airports
approached our task with the same rigor.
This is not about coming to you with a wishlist,
but doing the work across sectors
to provide the best contribution we can.
That's why we are here with two submissions,
our main NZ airport submission
and, uh, convening the joint infrastructure practitioners
group letter that you may have also seen.
Airports occupy a distinctive place in the planning system.
Their fixed infrastructure
with investment horizons measured in decades.
They serve functions that extend well
beyond their physical boundary,
and they sit at the center of significant
and growing communities of activity, businesses, employers,
supply chains that have located, co-located precisely
because the airport is there.
That co-location creates a planning challenge as much
as an economic opportunity,
because the same growth that reflects an airport's success
also generates pressure on its ability to operate.
How the planning system manages that tension,
whether it protects airport operations
or progressively constrains them, even unintentionally,
determines not just the airport's future,
but the future of everything that that depends on it.
And that's why the architecture of these bills means,
uh, so much to us.
The bills are by design enabling legislation.
They create architecture, the substance,
the detailed policy content
that will determine day-to-day planning outcomes will follow
through national instruments.
These a structural consequence to this design.
It means that the impact
of the bills will only be fully understood once the shape
and scope of national instruments are known.
What that means practically is
that you are approving a frame
before the walls have been built.
The most important question this committee can ask is
what should be settled now
and what should be delegated to others to determine later?
Some delegation is absolutely appropriate,
but some things are two foundational
to leave to that future process.
It also changes the weight you should give to what might
otherwise come across as process style requests
in a conventional system, a requirement, for instance,
that infrastructure providers be consulted on national
directions and spatial plans
might be considered a procedural nicety, useful, obvious,
but something that you as members might expect will be
worked out in practice in a top-down
nationally directive system.
It's something else entirely national direction cascades
through spatial plans, through local plans
and consenting problems surface when a spatial plan is
locked in incompatible land use
or a consent condition reflects a standard
that was never tested against operational reality.
Codifying engagement requirements then is not about adding
process for its own sake,
but about guaranteeing the quality of the decisions
that everything else in the system depends on.
So it encourage you to look at those requests.
With that in mind, one of the core objectives
of the reforms is to reduce the cost complexity
and adversarials of resource management.
With that in mind, I also recommend the committee adopt a
consistent analytical lens across all of the hearings.
Other provisions of these bills clear enough
that they can be applied predictably,
or do they leave room for competing interpretations
that will ultimately be tested
through litigation rather than resolved through plans
where the answer is the latter.
We suggest the committee should act now.
Otherwise, the objectives
of the reforms may not be met in this regard.
The areas of highest concern to us are the relationship
between goals and how conflicts between them are resolved
and the definition and treatment
of infrastructure across the bills.
Infrastructure protection is the ask every infrastructure
submitter has in common and for good reason.
The first reason is irreversibility.
When a sensitive land use establishes near an airport, such
as noise sensitive residential subdivision,
that decision compounds over time.
The houses are built, people move in expectations form,
and those expectations become politically real.
At that point, the airport's ability to operate
as designed is constrained, not by a formal decision,
but by accumulated fact on the ground.
The planning system did not interrupt that sequence,
so the airport must now manage what
around, what grew up beside it.
That dynamic is almost impossible
to reverse once it's set in.
And we see this all around the world.
So protective language in the legislation is what interrupts
that sequence before it starts.
Without that language, the burden falls on the operator
to assert their position Through every consent process
dispute and opportunities to fix things will be much rarer
and considerably harder in the new system.
That's why you'll see that desire
for protective language coming through
for many submitters in my kind of space.
The second reason is about what a plan led system is really
for the whole theory of these reforms is
that conflict should be resolved early at the spatial
planning and policy stage.
So they do not recur at the consent stage
without protective language in the primary legislation,
plans cannot reliably give effect to that intent.
The conflict is not resolved, it's just deferred
and it will reappear in problems downstream.
This is why we're recommending
that the legislation not just natural national direction,
contain affirmative protections for the operational
and functional requirements of existing infrastructure.
This means the legislation should clearly establish
that reverse sensitivity is to be managed in regional
and local plans, that infrastructure's operational
requirements are to be predicted
and a conditions imposed on infrastructure consents must be
necessary proportionate and practically workable.
These are things infrastructure needs from day one
and across all governments, not from the national direction
that may be shaped differently by governments over time.
Airport submissions, including those from Aland
and Christchurch airports will provide rich information on
the need to safeguard airport operations.
And I commend them to you. These aren't theoretical issues.
They're risks that quite frankly,
keep airport managers awake at night
to deliver well-planned growth.
Airports must be able to service that growth
and have a system that understands
that right from the beginning.
Finally, let me note, the work
of the Infrastructure practitioners group,
its submission brings together cross sector technical input
across telecommunications, energy, transport, health
and education infrastructure providers
that really have had the opportunity to, uh, come together.
And what struck me was the alignment of feedback across
that diverse group.
I hope that submission provides a useful framing point
as you work through individual, uh,
deeper sector submissions.
One final point from me is I have argued
that the new planning system will require a different form
of engagement than the old one.
Um, earlier more intense engagement to get things right
because of that top down nature of the system.
So I do encourage the committee to consider that
for your own work as well.
Um, ND airports, airports all around the country
and groups like the infrastructure practitioners group are
available and can work at speed.
Whether that means further feedback to you drafting advice,
stress testing provisions
or technical sessions, please use us
and I wish you all the best
for your process ahead. Thank you.
Thank you very much for that insight and your submission,
but we'll go to Rachel for the first question.
Thank you. And that's a very, um,
clear submission you've made as well in terms
of the importance of infrastructure and,
and the relationship to the spatial plans.
Um, I've got a, um,
a hypothetical question,
but it's about, uh, what we,
what we've heard about these vs is it's about the enjoyment
of private property rights.
Mm-hmm. And your specific interest for airports is
of across the news overlays
and the, um, reverse sensitivity issues
that you've discussed on the submission.
If, um, those that, sorry, the first question
or statement is that obviously
that is a restriction on the private property rights
of those people who have an noise overlaid
overlay applied to them.
Uh, what would happen if the, um,
the regulatory takings provisions applied to noise overlays?
Yeah,
Excellent question.
Um, and you'll see us, uh,
quite softly touching on that in our submission.
Um, I certainly don't think it would be workable,
particularly because, uh, one of the phenomenal
that we can expect a little bit more over time is
that fly path may move.
Um, so, uh, number one, uh, focus for good planning
of course is to make sure we, um, think ahead about, uh,
compatible land uses.
So, um, of course, industrial, commercial, um,
zoning near an airport is always going
to be much more workable than residential.
Um, that's under pressure every day.
Um, and so a lot of our focus on trying to have
that protective language language about buffers upfront in
legislation is about making sure
that planning discipline is there right from the start,
rather than having that tension throughout the process
where we are always having to kind of reassert the need
for the airport to be able to operate.
And people often raise with me, is this a real thing?
Does it really stop? Absolutely it does.
We've got cases, for instance, in Ardmore at the moment
where they can't, um, they can't do, uh,
they're very inflexible on how they do their, uh,
rescue helicopter training
because of how close the housing is, things like that.
And it does have a real impact on curfews, of course.
Um, so it's all about
that compatible planning right from the start.
Um, but there will always be things that, uh,
create pressure over time.
And if you think about, um, some of the reasons why
noise might change over time, obviously we hope
that it will reduce over time
with aircraft, aircraft technology.
Um, but flight paths sometimes do have to change.
Uh, that might be to reduce carbon emissions.
It might be due to efficiency and safety reasons,
and then having to then, um, stock take
that under a regulatory taking, uh,
mechanism would be almost impossible.
Um, so by layering in buffer language
and uh, diligent planning practices right from the
beginning, um, we'd hope to avoid that.
At the moment we think the regulatory
takings language is okay.
It's not going too far into that space, into a space
where you'd, you'd end up
with an uneconomic aviation system. Mm-hmm.
But if you did base your whole system on the enjoyment
of private property rights, then surely it would
include noise overlays.
That's more of a political question you don't
Need to answer. I like it. You're
absolutely right.
And it, it's one of those things
where I think we've got this constant tension where we,
we want, we want all the right things.
Um, we want residential growth, we want infrastructure
to be operating and optimized.
Private property rights also includes the ability
of infrastructure to operate
and continue to develop and grow.
So there is always gonna be a transaction point
where the legislation
and the national directions need to manage that tension and,
and decide, okay, which one is going to be most important
for regional and national significance, for instance.
So looking at the legislation to see how, how would exactly
that kind of situation be transacted in a clear
and predictable way is exactly the kind of thing
that we are looking for in our amendments. Thank
You. Just one more slight
question.
Yes. I just actually just had a quick step on that
because in your submission you do talk about
that relationship between designations and national rules,
and you've just slightly touched on it there.
Um, what is your solution to to that, if you think
that there's ambiguity there?
Um, for the most part, the,
the discussions across infrastructure providers have
suggested that, um, the,
the intent in the designation section seems to be
to stick pretty closely to where the RMA currently operates.
Yeah. But some of the drafting language has drifted away
from that a little bit and created some gaps.
And so our, um, thinking is that reverting to some
of the RMA language may be the best option.
Uh, as you can see, there were quite a lot of bits
and pieces that came up in designations.
Um, but I might ask Lauren if you'd like
to, to comment on that.
Um, designations and national rules.
Um, no, I think that's right, Billy, as far as
how you've summarized it in terms of, I think, you know,
infrastructure providers and designating authorities are
looking for it to go back to what the status quo, um, is.
There were some changes in particular around the suggestion
that, um, particular national rules relating
to contaminated land, for example, might be able to trump,
um, you know, designations, which I think is problematic
for requiring authorities, you know, who have gone
or through that process already
of obtaining their designation.
And, and generally the position is that those, um,
designations, uh, should prevail given
that they have already adequately,
um, assessed those effects.
And, and what we want to avoid through the new system is,
you know, creating more consenting requirements
and having unintended consequences, um, through I think
what, you know, the bill has currently drafted, um,
could have that potential outcome.
Mm-hmm. It feels like the designation section was one
where perhaps inadvertently additional process
to the RMA has been added that could be, um, reverted
to the status quo with the idea
that essentially legislature is trying
to streamline as much as possible.
Okay. Thank you. Rachel, you've got another quick
Question. Yeah, yeah. So one on
that and one different question,
but on the conversation we've just been happening,
the wording in the MBA, were you happy with that wording
around designations is my first question.
And then second question might be for Lauren as well, um,
in terms of what you want around spatial plans and,
and what you've discussed in your submission,
is all the wording changes in your submission
or, um, would you have further changes in,
and you referenced in other documents?
Sorry, that I don't have in front of me.
Oh, no, that's fine. Yes.
Um, so I might comment on the second one
and ask, um, Lauren
to comment on the NBEA language on designations,
um, on spatial planning.
Yes. I think our, um, submission covers all
of the amendments that we think are appropriate
or workable to put forward, noting that, um, you know, you,
you don't, you don't come
with the idea of rewriting the whole thing.
Um, so we'd be comfortable with that.
And the, the key things being is infrastructure defined
and prominent enough when you think about
how much upfront work is required in the new system
to avoid, um, consequences later on.
And also is that engagement embedded, um, a lot of, uh,
concern just to make sure that, um, parliament expresses
that view that, for instance,
infrastructure providers should be engaged, uh,
for national directions, spatial plans,
and embedded in that part of the system.
If that's set in, set in the legislation, we feel confident
and we can then play our role.
Um, and things will flow appropriately from there,
because generally speaking, infrastructure like airports,
we are good spatial planners.
We want to be part of making it a success, um,
and it's gonna be really essential
to be in that upfront part.
Um, but, uh, Lauren, are you able
to comment on the NBEA language on designations at all?
Um, just on that one, I assume that you are referring to
the LA the labor earlier proposal
of the NBEA, is that what you're referring to?
Uh, not just a proposal, an act? Well,
The act, yes, you're correct.
The act, um, yeah, look off, off the top of my head.
Um, yeah, I think we'd have to go back
and do an, do another comparison,
but I certainly don't recall at the time that, you know,
we had done the review of that act
and those bills that there were similar, you know, concerns
that we are raising in, in this process, um,
as it was at that time.
Yeah, I think thank fair, Thank you.
Look, we'll now move to Lan who's got her
hand up there on Zoom.
Ura, can you hear me Okay? Yes.
Awesome. Thank you. Thanks for your submission today.
Uh, mine was really just a supplementary, uh,
from the previous discussion about you wanting
to obviously secure the role of infrastructure
and you're proposing to remove, uh, the word significant
in terms of significant infrastructure from clause 86.
Do you think, um, all airports are already
significant infrastructure
or you just wanna broaden it to infrastructure generally?
Um, for for what reason?
Because I mean, as, as a sort of lay person in the
infrastructure area, I would consider airports to
be places of significant infrastructure.
So can you expand why you'd like to see that change?
Just bringing up that part.
It's a really good question,
and I think it goes to, um, a lot of the work
that we constantly do.
I agree if are significant.
Um, and, uh, particularly when you, when you look at kind
of national and regional significance, the, the truth is
that, um, when it comes to actually applying, uh,
planning processes in legislation, it's,
it's certainly never a given that, uh,
the players in the system will regard it in the same way.
Um, and, you know, we see this often where, um,
even at the moment, the ability of airports to, um,
engage fully in, for instance, fast track, uh, um,
fast track proposals that might affect their,
uh, operations.
These things are never a given, um,
which is why we're always looking for some kind
of explicit reference wherever we can, uh,
because it just removes that question.
Um, so I think yeah, your,
your instinct would be absolutely right.
It's just whether, uh, whether some language
and the legislation helps to just remove question around it
or any variability around it.
Um, Lauren, is there anything you would build
on what I've said?
I think that's absolutely right, Billy.
It's really for airports
and other infrastructures providers, removing
that ambiguity.
There has been quite a lot of discussion at, you know,
various planning processes around the country, around
what is regionally and nationally
significant infrastructure.
And despite your instincts, as Billy said,
being absolutely right, we would say that all airports,
sometimes, you know, for smaller operators,
I I'm thinking particularly more about our regional, um,
airports and aerodromes.
Sometimes that question may come up
and, you know, in, in our view in airport NZ airport's view,
they absolutely are significant infrastructure.
So we just want to remove, um, any question
or ambiguity around that in, in the legislation.
I guess my question with removing the significance though,
and broadening it so much
to infrastructure generally is potentially it could risk
the very thing you're trying to do
by protecting the significant stuff,
but when it's so broad, um,
Yeah, I think our response to
that would be is the other part
of the NZ airport submission.
And I think other infrastructure providers seeking the same
thing as a consistent definition across both pieces
of legislation of infrastructure,
which would then include from an airport's perspective,
all of those airports.
Um, but there is also the ability
as we understand it in terms of
how those environmental limits will then ultimately be, um,
or those consenting pathways
through environmental limits will ultimately be determined,
um, through national instruments, I guess is the ability
through that process as well to, you know,
provide further clarity.
Mm. And I think the, um, this one has also come
through in the IPG submission, um, around the fact that
that pathway that is created
for significant infrastructure should be workable and, um,
and useful enough for the broader infrastructure.
The other kind of pressure that's also come
through is from our colleagues
and social infrastructure, um,
and the recognition of, um, say health
and education infrastructure to, um,
to be included in the same kinds of processes where, uh,
that's still a little bit of a new way of thinking about
that term, um,
and broadening out some of these, uh, processes.
While it's not a key part of n Airports, uh, we recognize
that it's a key priority for them.
Look, thank you very much for your submission today.
We have met time. Uh, we appreciate all your insights.
Um, so thank you. Thank you,
Thank you.
Right. We will now move onto our next submitter
or Mantu Settlement Trust,
who I believe are joining us online.
Wait for them to come through.
Kda, we go Kda George, we can see you there.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You've got 20 minutes with us, so, uh, we'll hand it over
to you to open up and members will then have questions.
So thank you.
I'm just going to go get straight into it
because I know that, um, sometimes we'll run out of time
and, and I'll stop talking too.
So I'm just gonna go straight to the appendix
because I do believe that everybody's, um, read
what we have been doing and read the submission.
So I'm just gonna go straight to that.
Uh, really around definition of iwi authority, um,
the phrase iwi authority is used in both bills, uh,
to describe the entity that must be consulted as part
of the development of certain planning in instruments.
And then, um, with, with that is that, um,
in both of those bills, the meaning the authority
that represents an iwi that is recognized by that iwi
as having authority to do so, a, a number of iwi, including
mantu, uh,
have established their post settlement governance entities,
the PSGE, to receive and manage settlement assets
and to represent the iwi on a range of matters,
including those relating to settlement with, uh, the crown,
given the PSGs are a com commonly implemented legal
structure and that A-P-S-G-E represents an iwi
and is recognized by the iwi is having, uh,
the authority to do so.
So, ros, in short, TU settlement trust
considers the definition of iwi authority should be
expressly referred to A PSG as a type of iwi authority,
um, to this end.
So ROMs submits the definition
of iwi authority in both bills should be amended as follows,
the authority that represents an iwi,
and that is recognized by that iwi is
as having the authority to do so
and includes the post settlement governance entity
for an iwi where one has been established.
Uh, then I'll just carry on.
So TED and treaty clause RPM clause eight,
uh, and of course in the NB clause eight
N-B-E-N-E-B clause eight, they
explanatory note to both bills, indicates
that the government has deliberately chosen to prescribe
how the crown will give effect to the responsibilities under
the treaty in the proposed legislation.
So, romps, oh, oh, s**t, if you bear with me.
Sorry, my, uh, technology's not playing,
playing the game with me.
Uh, so, so in terms of that, so Romps,
sorry, look,
I'm just going to go straight to it.
So, oh,
oh, excuse me.
No, that's okay. Yeah, yeah.
It's just my, um, my technology's not playing the game
with me this morning, and, um,
oh wow.
Can you believe that? Have you got that written out?
Yeah. Printing is always useful.
Yes. Yeah, definitely is.
So, um, look, look, sorry about that.
So, the, um, utility, here we go.
San is a sub extensively, uh, given effect to,
and the, uh, PB and the NEB
and the circumstances in which those exercise powers
and the functions under,
under the both those acts are required
to take into account te the treaty, the treaty, uh,
the clause,
and both bills fixes the way in which the government
interprets tei
to the point at which the legislation is enacted.
In doing so, the drafting of these provisions fails
to acknowledge that Titi is a living instrument whose
interpretation and application develops over time, including
through the publication of reports by the Wang Tribunal
and the Insurance of Judgments by the cor by the courts.
ROMs is concerned that this is approach, this approach is
to drafting TTI clauses could limit the way in which the
government's responsibilities under Titi develops over time
by limiting the extent to which the judgments of the courts
and reports of the Wang Tribunal are given effect
to in the context of land use planning
and natural resource management.
Furthermore, the ti clause in both bills only refers
to the recognition of the Crown's responsibilities in
relation to the Treaty of Wang Tii.
The relevant clauses in both bills do not refer
to the rights and interests of Maori Ros considers.
This is a significant issue in terms
of the way in which the bills have been drafted as they fail
to recognize the way in which the rights
and interests of Maori as set out in
are recognized, uh, in this regard.
Ram's notes that Sue Hughes Ros translation
of Article two of into English stated relevantly,
the Queen of England agrees to protect the Chiefs,
the Subtribes, and all the people of New Zealand,
and the unqualified exercise
of the chief ship over the lands, villages,
and all the treasures.
So that's footnotes seven.
And that translation stated, unqualified exercise
of the chief ship would emphasize to achieve
that Queen's intentions to give them complete control.
According to the Customs, 10 has the connotations of
Aqua Central, uh, ROMs considers the natural environment
to be a treasure that it exercises
ship over according to its customs.
In light of what has agreed between the Crown
and Maori under ROMs considered, it is an important
that ti clauses in which Bill recognizes the matters which
were agreed between the Crown
and Maori under Article two of relative, relative to
how the equivalent provisions were drafted in the RMA,
the way these provisions have been drafted also limits the
circumstances in which crown actors are required
to have regard or give effect to the RMA Section eight
requires or persons exercising functions
and powers under it in relation
to managing the use development and protection of natural
and physical resources.
To take into account the principles of Treaty of Ang
as drafted, these provisions significantly narrow their, uh,
recognition of the Crown's responsibilities under Threet
as compared to the RMA.
The RMA applies to all persons exercising functions
and powers underneath the leg legislate legislation
during the above together.
ROS Pro primary submission is that the text and Clause eight
and both those acts should be replaced
with wording equivalent to the RMA Section eight.
This will ensure that both the Crown's responsibilities
and the rights and interests of Maori under
TTI are recognized in both pieces of legislation.
It would also ensure that ti is taken into account in the
wide range of circumstances that may arise
underneath both of the acts.
In the event the bills are not amended in line
with the submission rom submits, the bills should be amended
to expressly recognize the rights
and interests of Maori under Titi.
In particular, ROMs submits the bills should be amended
to expressly require all persons exercising functions
and powers underneath them.
Sh shall a particular regard to the rights
and interests of Maori under, including
through the recognition of the Tonga
and Kaga of Maori over the Tonga as recognized in,
in, uh, clause 10.
This is, uh, effect given to
in Clause 10 on both bills preserves the effect of Titi
and settlement agreements under the RMA until such time
as an agreement is reached between the relevant Iwi Hapu
and the Crown underneath Clause nine.
However, clause 10, section three,
and both bills expressly excludes, uh,
statutory acknowledgements from the scope
of those transitional and arrangements.
Settlement with the Crown includes a statutory
acknowledgement in relation to areas
of land in which the Iwi has particular cultural, spiritual,
and historical association with.
This is recorded in the RAN Settlement Claim Act 2016,
um, sub section 20 19 36.
Uh, and the statutory acknowledgement made to is a key part
of the settlement that day.
Iwi agreed with the crown.
The statutory acknowledgement
that is recorded in the Settlement Act refers
to certain provisions in the RMA, for example, C section 35,
uh, 31 and 35.
While both the acts include provision that are similar
to the provisions in the RMA
regarding statutory acknowledgement,
the settlement act will need to be updated
to refer the relevant provisions
and the PPB
and NEB instead of the RMA pending the,
those negotiations taking place
and amendments being, uh, enacted.
There may be some confusion about how the provisions
and the PB and NEB relating
to statutory acknowledgements interact
with the settlement Act, given that, uh,
given the settlement Act is a form
of treaty settlement redress
or arrangements for the purposes of the PB
and NEB, if Clause 10,
section three is removed from both bills, clause 10
of both bills will preserve the effect
of the statutory acknowledgements given
to Tani pending negotiations taking the place with the Crown
and Settlement Act being updated
and amended rom submits
that Clause 10 63 should be removed from both bills.
How much time have I got?
You have got, uh, about nine minutes left. Okay.
So, uh, just, uh, we have got quite a few questions, so, um,
maybe if you just want to kind
of wrap up your introductions there and we'll open it up.
Okay, cool. Look at, at the end of it, we,
we don't want to get rid of what's,
what's happening in terms of, uh, the, the reform,
but we, we actually, like every, every Maori
and every year we in the country, we wanna make sure
that we are there, um, in partnership, being able
to make some decisions, especially to do with our,
and what's happening within our own,
and making sure too that our settlement trust
and those through who have already settled, uh,
are are those partners that are our main players in, uh,
our cultural interests
and spiritual interests. I'm looking for questions.
Thank you. Thank you, George, for that.
Look, we'll go to Hua first. Um, and then Rachel Brooking.
Um, thank you very much for your submission this morning,
and, um, I appreciate your note.
Um, in reference to the importance of listing, um,
post settlement governance entities as a part
of the iwi authority provisions within the legislation,
I think that should go without saying, um,
but it's good that you have stated that, um,
the RMA proper has been a part of our nuts
and bolts as Iwi Maori for such a long time.
Um, and the practical application
of the RMA is often seen in Marai and Hapu spaces.
Not all iwi have had capacity when is so massive, um,
to cover, uh, vast tribal, uh, and territories
and covering RMA issues.
Do you think in terms of representation,
'cause we can see very much that, um, the focus is on Iwi
and Iwi authorities
and those with mandates that we could lose the space
for Hapu and Marai to have the ongoing voice
and footprint across that local space,
and that, um, iwi are absolutely important,
but we need to see more layers of
how Maori represent ourselves
and have those gumbo on the ground in the mahi.
Uh, yeah, I, I totally agree
with what you, what you're seeing.
I think it just, I will shoot myself in the foot,
but I'm, I'm going to be honest, it really comes down to us
as individual, uh, people who hold
that leadership making sure that in that leadership role
as an, that you're communicating to all your people,
that you're making sure that those ones, that
with the gum boots on the ground, that you're out there
with the gum boots on the ground, so you can actually give
that information that you actually inform
and educate, um, our people
and what's happening, especially to even to do
with this RMA reform.
Um, there'll be a whole lot of people
who have their gum boots on the ground
and they'll say it not just Maori
and our Maori that actually don't know what's,
what's happening because of the communication
out into the public arena.
And so it is those things about if
you don't know, you don't know.
And so it's making sure
that the communication is spread really fast
so we can actually touch base and feed that back in.
If I can stop on that, um, thank you for raising it.
'cause I think, you know, everyone's got a bit
of submission fatigue.
Um, there's so much that we have to engage in.
And so, you know, I, I'm appreciating the volume
and the quality of the submissions coming
through from Iwi Maori groups as well.
Um, you know, signaling just as you have the protections
that are needed to uphold and maintain our teti rights, uh,
but also ensuring that the layers of Maori representation,
like you've raised statutory acknowledgements, um,
are a part of our bread and butter.
Now, in terms of those levers, um, that we have
with the crown across our, across our resources as kaki.
Um, in terms of that, do you think
that the legislation needs to strengthen the way that it
recognizes how Maori move across different and
'cause people have different capacity?
Yes. Yes, it definitely does.
Uh, because then we, we lose that
sight in terms of what's important for us to make sure.
So I do think that that's one
of the important things is making sure that
that is strengthened and,
and some of that strengthening is actually, um, in terms
of having a, a true partnership, right?
And, you know, so it's really about that.
And of course it does need
to be strengthened across the whole broad
because, uh, as you know, as iwi, there are
so many submissions and everything's happening,
and some of us have a, a job
and we actually have to deal to our job as well as deal
to what's happening with, with our people as well.
And so we haven't got that luxury of having, you know,
other people who could do the research
and other people who can write the reports
and other, you know, so it is important for that to happen.
Thank you. Tha thank you. Uh, we'll now go to Rachel.
Got a quick question.
You've, uh, suggested the wording
of the treaty clause go back
to what's currently in the Resource Management Act, which is
to take into account,
and I'm interested in why you chose
that wording rather than the wording that, um,
labor's legislation that the government repealed had
to give effect to, which is a stronger wording
and is, um, seen in the Conservation Act.
I I'm just wondering why you, why you chose that?
Um, take into account phrasing.
No, it's, um, it depends on
what audience you're talking to, right?
And, and I'll be honest about that.
And so taking into account would fall a little bit ear, uh,
a little bit softly and a little bit more inclusively in the
ears that I'm talking to and in the
community who I'm talking to.
Uh, but that's where it sits and that's the reason why, uh,
because, um, we want this to go forward,
but we actually want to make sure that, uh, some
of our rights and responsibilities are looked
after while we're going forward doing that.
Got it. Thank you. Thank you.
And Lan Farm has a question,
Qua George, thank you so much for your submission today.
Um, I just wanted to pick up on the environmental
TTA outcomes themselves,
because you've outlined really clearly the more like
treaty rights and obligations aspects.
What has Rangi tan's, uh, experience been
with potentially like the setting of environmental limits
or targets at a regional level?
Because we know that this new system isn't gonna have
nationally determined environmental bottom lines.
All of that is gonna be determined at a regional level,
but really all those environmental bottom lines have
to be balanced with economic considerations as well.
Do you think there is enough protections in this bill when
it comes to actually protecting
It? Is if we have the
relationship
and we have a true relationship with our regional partners,
I think that's probably the most important thing
that I'd say about that.
We, we can't, we, we cannot allow, allow things
to be happening within our region if we haven't
got a true relationship.
I think that's probably one of the biggest things is we,
as a, as a new, I suppose a new wish settlement, uh,
doing right now is making sure
that we are forging those relationships, making sure
that we are maintaining those relationships so
that we are the first point of call in terms of anything
that's happening, um, throughout our district
and especially in that environmental space.
Um, and,
and also to that relationship, right,
is about having dialogue,
but also having discourse to get to an outcome.
And so it's being able to sit there and talk honestly
and truthfully about
what we see together and what is the dream.
So I think most importantly out of all of that is, um, yes,
we are, but also too, we are still forging ahead in terms
of building those relationships
because as you know, um, people come
and go in the positions that they are, they are in
that our iwi stays here for centuries and, and still will.
So the faces will change, but our our won't
Look. Thank you
very much, George. We will have to leave it there.
But we appreciate your submission today
and obviously getting past the challenges of technology.
Uh, so thank you very much.
So we now move through to our next submitter
who is here in person, uh, horticulture New Zealand.
Welcome Kate to this, this morning.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us.
Uh, we have obviously got your two submissions here on the
two V, so, um, we will hand it over to you to talk us
through those and then we'll open it up for
Questions. Wonderful. Thank
you very much
and thanks for having, uh, us along today.
I'm joined by Emily Levison, who is one of our policy, um,
advisors and the team as well.
Look, I've only got, um, hopefully a few brief points
that I want to cover off, uh, today in the hope
that we can then spend time, uh, answering your questions.
But I thought it would be useful to start
by framing up, uh, horticulture.
As one of New Zealand's fastest growing
and most valuable sectors,
the industry produces healthy food for New Zealanders
and the world generating approximately 7.6 billion in value
across domestic and export markets to help ensure
that New Zealanders have access to healthy food year round,
to support the 40,000 plus people employed in the industry
to enable thriving regional communities
and to continue to provide for future export growth
and support of the government's double export ambition.
The horticulture sector requires fit for purpose regulation.
Hor NZ supports the interests
of New Zealand's 4,300 commercial fruit
and vegetable growers alongside product groups
and district associations who supported our submissions.
Uh, and we are going to hear from our colleagues
at Vegetables New Zealand shortly.
NZ is supportive of the need to reform the RMA.
The current RMA has, in many instances made it difficult,
if not impossible, for existing growers
to navigate consent obligations.
This is especially so for vegetable growers,
but is also true for horticulturalists across the board,
including, for example, those seeking consent
for irrigation bird scaring
and frost frost protection structures
and worker, uh,
workers accommodation facilities to name a few.
The government's intention is
that the new planning system will be easier
and less expensive for growers
and farmers with fewer consents
and better conditions for development.
However, hor NZ is concerned that the drafting
of the bills does not match the government's intent.
And without amendment many horticultural operations face
outcomes that may be substantially worse than the current
RMA, our submissions have focused on helping
to resolve these areas of disconnect
and have proposed amendments that would, in our view, help
to deliver on the set intent of the bills.
I'm just going to cover off, uh, very briefly, um, uh, a few
of those key aspects that in our mind, uh,
require some careful consideration.
The first is in relation
to setting up an appropriate pathway for national direction
for vegetables, there needs to be goals
that support food production.
We want to, uh, talk to very briefly the activity status
and overallocated catchments, the, the potential
for cost transfer from consenting to compliance
around permitted activities, the matter
of reverse sensitivity, collective water storage,
and the idea of taxes
or levies on the allocation of natural resources.
And finally, the need to enable the use
of highly productive land.
So firstly, a clear pathway is needed for national direction
for vegetables, and
that national direction is needed urgently as soon as
that second tranche of secondary
legislation can come through.
We have a number of regions including, uh, the Waikato
and the NU, who are still have plan changes working their
way through the environment court
and without national direction.
Uh, many of those growers will continue
to face impossible consenting processes
and consenting obligations which may leave many facing the
likelihood of not being able
to cont obtain consent to continue to operate.
And I'm sure, um, the vegetables team will be able
to give you more information around the impacts of
that directly on them and their growers.
National direction under the new bills needs
to give effect to the goals.
That's why we've proposed goals
that give the government a pathway to fix this problem,
either through enabling the supply of fresh fruit
and vegetables or through activities of national importance,
recognizing that domestic food supply is a matter
of national importance.
Secondly, uh, in relation to the activity status
and over allocated catchments, this is a concern.
Section 70 and section 1 0 7, uh,
matters under the current RMA need
to be addressed within the NEA,
the way the bill is drafted states that the existing, uh,
permitted activities and over allocated catchments will now
be required to obtain a consent.
This would be a worse outcome than the RMA for many growers.
For example, uh, fruit growing is largely
permitted throughout the country.
As is vegetable growing in many regions.
We run the risk that a number
of our growers would now be facing the need
to obtain consent, especially with their activities,
could still be considered to be less than minor.
Much horticulture activity takes place in over allocated
catchments at the urban rural fringe, not
because horticulture is creating that over allocation, but
because of the overall mix of urban
and rural activities in those areas.
The way these sections are drafted would mean
that most horticultural activities would require a
restricted discretionary or discretionary consent.
Even we are growers are making environmental improvements.
This is worse than the status quo, particularly
for orchardists who do have a very minimal
effect on freshwater quality.
Is seeking a change to this drafting, especially
to recognize that the government only just made amendment
amendments to the RMA back in 2025 to ensure
that activities can continue to be permitted
or obtain consent
and over allocated catchments where there are standards
that make sure that those activities will reduce their
environmental impacts over reasonable timeframes.
We think that this is a much more sensible approach
to allow food production
to continue while also actively seeking
to make environmental improvements.
We're also seeking the reintroduction
of the controlled activity status
permitted activities in our mind look to be more expensive
and require a greater upfront burden of cost
under the NEA compared to the status quo quo, which is
concerning clarity is needed about
how freshwater farm plans fit into
the new consenting regime.
A grower should not need to meet a laundry list
of permitted activities, uh, requirements
that have already been met
through their freshwater farm plan.
In HN Z's view, if a grower has a freshwater farm plan,
especially through an audit, audited
and certified industry assurance program like NZ gap,
they should automatically meet the permitted activity
requirements on the regional council natural
environment side of things.
The district council and
and planning bill aspects are slightly different
because a freshwater farm plan does not cover things such
as noise standards, heights of structures, et cetera.
We've been very clear that freshwater farm plan requirements
shouldn't be duplicated elsewhere in the consenting process
because that just simply adds to the cost
and information requirements
for growers without any additional benefit.
Reverse sensitivity needs
to be addressed in the planning bill,
despite being a key point in the expert
advisory group's blueprint.
The concept of,
and the concept of those who come
to the nuisance should not be able to complain,
has not been reflected in the planning bill.
Greater national priority is needed
for collective water storage at the moment.
There are proposed changes that enable, um, on farm storage,
but for many of our growers, that is simply not an option
because they operate on very small land holdings.
And we should be seeking to ensure collective water storage
is uplifted alongside other long lived infrastructure.
And finally, uh, we need to enable the use
of highly productive land for primary production
through linking spatial planning to resource allocation.
Hoard NZ also does not support market-based allocations
for natural re or natural resources levies.
So thank you very much and happy to take your question.
Brilliant. Well, thank you very much
for your in-depth submission.
Um, obviously we appreciate fruit
and vegetable growing, very important.
Um, you know, part of our economy.
Look, I might take the privilege
of asking the first question
'cause I was, uh, interested in the talk
around water allocation and best practice.
Um, and obviously section 70, um,
and you're talking about over allocated aquifers.
I mean, can you just give us a few examples potentially
where, you know, this could become an issue?
Yeah, so, um, I think, uh, an example might be
if you take a, a catchment
and that catchment has a, um, diverse range
of land uses operating with it in it, which has meant that,
uh, from an allocation perspective,
let's take whether it's water quality
or water quantity, um, it could be deemed
to be over allocated.
Now the term over allocation, uh,
can be interesting from a planning perspective.
And that's because when we talk about over allocation,
we could end up with a situation
where over allocation is based on
what might be an aspirational target
for water quality rather than, um,
some other metric that sits within there.
So if we have a catchment that might be over allocated,
a number of our growers, particularly if you take,
I don't know, uh, an apple orchard in the Hawke's Bay, uh,
as an example for you, why, why would you use that?
Um, well that's a pretty live one
and we could talk about our summer fruit orchards in,
um, As an alternative.
Uh, we take those, um, those land uses,
they have a relatively low footprint in terms
of impact on the environment.
Um, they are low uses,
but those growers would be facing a situation
where if these, uh,
words were introduced in the way in which they've been
drafted, those growers which are currently uh,
permitted activities
but might be operating within an over allocated catchment
would now be facing, uh, the requirement
to obtain a consent, which would, in this instance,
only be able to be a restricted discretionary
or discretionary consent
because the controlled activity pathway
has also been removed.
So that's adding substantive additional cost
for those growers without any significant environmental
benefit because their effects
of their activities are already, uh, very low. Mm.
Okay. And just a sub on that,
because you talked also about the permitted activity.
Yeah. Um, and you know, if a grower
and central Otago
or a grower in Hawke's Bay, um, had a freshwater farm plan,
um, you know, that that should be sufficient.
Could you just elaborate a little bit further on that? Yeah.
Um, so in terms of, um, freshwater farm plan,
so at the moment, a large number
of our growers operate under an industry, um,
assurance scheme, whether that's, uh, NZ gap or global gap.
And so those programs, uh, require those growers
to meet a variety of different standards.
And those plans are then audited, uh, on a, um,
relatively frequent basis.
And so they're already demonstrating compliance
with a large number of those same requests
that would fall under the RMA system.
And so from our perspective, it seems slightly pointless
to require those growers to have duplicative processes.
So we support the intent to, um, make pathways
for recognition of industry assurance plans.
But what we don't want to see happen is
that if there is at the moment, um, a huge amount
of front loading to demonstrate you're, uh,
permitted activity as is proposed in this bill,
that you would have to provide all of
that information at the outset to demonstrate
that you are permitted and then you would still also have
to prepare your, uh, freshwater farm plan.
And so there is a doubling up of obligation on growers,
which seems, um, slightly perverse in terms of
what it is they're trying to manage.
Okay. Thank you. And Rachel has a question? Yes.
I've got two questions, uh, related though.
So, so one is still on this activity status. Yep.
And so you're saying you want controlled activities back.
Um, do you think there's a route through of making
things restricted, discretionary rather than discretionary
and have tightly managed restricted discretionary,
I might call them proper restricted discretionary,
if you can comment on that.
Um, and then also if you can comment on one
of your specific asks is about the, the sequence of, um,
environmental limits and spatial planning.
And can you, um, tell us
why, why you think that's important? Yep.
Um, so if I touch on the first question around, uh,
could we have tightly controlled,
restricted discretionary activities if I draw on my 25 years
experience as an RMA planner?
Um, yes, I think you could take that pathway.
However, my experience would tell me that in the past
where we've had many attempts at having restricted
discretionary activities that more often than not, um,
the matters of discretion seem to
have very broad interpretive, uh, obligations around them,
which mean that even those people
who might have thought they were going through a
restricted discretionary, tightly held process can find
themselves in an overly complicated process
that might be held up by, you know, multiple section nine
to two requests are unreasonable requests
for further information that then get well beyond the scope
of the effects that are trying to be controlled.
And so I think you would need to turn your mind to
what those matters were
and have very clear interpretive, um, you know,
guidelines perhaps for onto of a better term, for users
of the system to be very clear
that these processes under restricted discretionary are not
intended to be wide ranging, like, you know, more, um,
complex discretionary or, or nonlying activities might be.
And the second question about the sequencing.
Yeah. So in terms of the sequencing,
I thought I might ask, um, Emily's touch on that, um,
in a little bit more detail.
Sure. Um, so our understanding of
how the sequencing will work with spatial planning is
that somewhere in the national direction
or national planning standards, we're going
to get some standardized zones
and those will have some standardized provisions
that will apply to those zones for the types
of activities that could occur there.
Then the councils will get together
and do a spatial plan where they set all of those zones
and then presumably the natural environment plans
and the, um, land use plans get made
and people will be able to be permitted
activities or get consents under those.
But if the situation occurs where we don't know
how much room attachment has for various activities,
we put it in a zone that has certain enabling provisions
for those activities, everyone gets really excited
that they'll be able to do those activities there.
And then we get to the limit setting
and the consenting piece and we say actually there's no room
for all of those activities to happen.
It could create, um, a swing, um,
that just creates more uncertainty rather than certainty,
which is what we're trying to achieve through the bill.
Another thing that's been quite frustrating
for our growers has been around highly productive land.
We support the need to protect, um, fertile land
for growing, but it's no good protecting land if you can't
then use it for its productive purpose, which in, um,
our instance would be horticulture.
So if in your spatial planning you set a highly productive
zone, you say, no urban development here, no housing here,
but then there's no room to um, enable its use
through the ability to discharge
or take water, then you've got land that can't be used
for any particular purpose.
Um, and so that ends up tying it up
and sterilizing it, which is, um, not its best use.
Thank you. Thank you. Look, Ryan Hamilton has a question.
Uh, thanks chair and thank you both for your submission.
Um, just a bit of a theme I guess from your submission
and earlier around the national instruments
and national direction, obviously a little bit hard
because you haven't,
haven't got visibility of some of that stuff.
So just your comments around,
you mentioned making sure we clear up competing goals.
Uh, within that, do you see existing
conflicts within the legislation
or is it more of a signal
to make sure we avoid based on current
issues within the RMA?
Uh, look, I think it would,
and I'll invite Emily, Emily to uh,
pass some comment on this shortly,
but I think from my perspective it's
a combination of those things.
Uh, we have been very clear about, uh, our desire
to have national direction that enables, uh, vegetable, uh,
production to occur.
However, before that can actually,
'cause we haven't seen the detail, what we need
to make sure is that for that secondary legislation
to be able to be brought in in the future, there needs
to effectively be hooks from which you can hang the
secondary legislation on in the primary legislation.
And so at the moment when there is no goals
that are specific, for example, to enabling, you know,
whether it's food production
or whether it's enabling, um, you know, fruit, fruit
and vegetable production, without that,
then your secondary legislation runs the risk
of being slightly, um, I guess surplus to requirements
because you would never be able to,
and then in, in effect give effect
to the primary legislation
because it's not enabled through the goals.
Yeah. So, and, and would that need to go in both bills
or do you think that specifically needs to hang,
that architecture needs to hang
and then the environment bill or the um, planning bill?
Well, I think we've probably talked about it from both
aspects, but I don't know,
Emily, if you want to touch on that.
I think for that aspect it could just be in the
environment bill, because I believe both bills say
that national direction can give
effect to goals in either bill.
Mm. Um, but the other part we can highlight is
that in the planning bill currently there's quite a bit
of specificity in the goals about urban areas
that isn't necessarily balanced for rural areas as well.
Um, so one of the things that we've proposed,
proposed in our submission is separating the goals
for well-functioning urban areas
and well-functioning rural areas.
So we can specify that the purpose of rural areas,
of rural zoning is to enable primary production in our view.
And that's generally how it's been reflected in plans.
Um, so just specifying that in the bill.
And also there's a goal around, um, urban infrastructure
and just recognizing
that infrastructure is also very important
for rural activities.
Um, and that can be included in the
goals as well. Thank you.
Look, thank you. Look, we've got a flurry
of questions on the screen here, so we'll go to Land Farm
Kira ua. Thank you
for your submission.
Um, I just have a question of clarification
because in your submission you talk about not supporting,
um, farm scale land use limits, input limits
or output limits.
And these are all to do with the caps on the resource use,
but you do support the environmental
effects being managed at the catchment level rather
than individual scale.
Can you just for the committee
to understand where your position is.
Um, you'll, you'll likely be aware of the situation
and Lake Topo,
where there's essentially a resource cap on nitrogen
leaching, which has basically protected this catchment.
Are you comfortable with that being the scale of
where these controls might sit?
And can you help us understand that?
Yeah, thank you for your question.
So, um, from our perspective, when you talk about, um,
limits at a farm scale, it can be very, very difficult
to actually manage the effects at a farm scale when the
effects can be created beyond the farm.
And so we actually, in my mind,
to deliver the best likelihood of delivering better outcomes
for the environment, focus on
how we actually collectively manage
impacts at a catchment scale.
Because that also on the flip side, allows for broader, um,
catchment wide initiatives that might also help
to contribute, for example, around improving water quality,
which will have a greater likelihood of success than just
focusing right inside the farm gate.
And that's because spatially where, um,
where impacts occur are not the same.
And so it's about how do we,
how do we take a broader look at
this issue of water quality? Mm.
Brilliant. Thank you. Look, um,
Cameron Luxton has a question.
Uh, thank you Chair. Uh, just my question is,
do you think there is enough, uh, specificity, uh,
well-defined terms for water supply?
So, um, with the different types of water supply we have,
you know, with wastewater, storm water, um,
flood management, um, even geothermal water used
for frost protection, do you think
that there is enough definition on those terms?
Oh, that's a great question.
I haven't probably turned my mind to that in great detail,
but, uh, what I would say is, um, it is very helpful to be
as clear as we can when it comes to, uh, defining
what we talk about when we talk about, uh, water storage.
Um, in my experience, um, you know, we have large dams
that have been captured under the likes of the building act
and the dam safety regulations.
And so there is a definition for them,
but a lot of the, the scale of water storage
or other storage that we talk about might fall outside
of those seed guidelines.
So look, um, in my experience,
the more clarity we can provide, then the less, uh,
there is the risk for interpretation
that creates unintended consequences.
Thank you. Uh, look, now we'll move to pre anchor.
Thank you. Um, can you hear me all right?
Yes. Oh, good.
Uh, so my question was, um, about the point that you made
around the funnel, um, the way that the funnel
of the new system works, so between spatial planning
and environmental limits, pretty much exactly
what Rachel asked.
Um, so I'll just make mine a bit of a s to, to hers, keen
to get, um, a clearer sense of
what some tangible impacts would be to growers.
Um, on, on that, basically just how problematic would
that lack of certainty, uh, be for your growers,
particularly given that schedule two clause 32
of the planning bill, um, could mean
that national instruments could direct a review
of the spatial plan once environmental limits are set.
Great. Thank you. And look, um, I'm fairly confident that,
uh, some of my vegetable colleagues, which includes some
of our growers, will be able to give you a,
a very real life example of that.
But what I would say is that, um,
spatial planning in my experience,
works well in urban environments.
However, it hasn't always been proven to work
so well in rural environments.
And that's because the scale at which you are trying
to control activities,
and especially if you take a lens from a horticultural
perspective, the activities that we undertake occur in
that peri-urban area between, uh, urban and rural land use.
And that is the space that we use
that changes the most frequently.
And sometimes when we undertake spatial planning processes,
they, they attempt to take a
long-term view to managing that.
So typically, you know, that 30 year time horizon,
however, the use of that land, uh, can change substantially.
And yet sometimes we see a very ized approach, uh, to
how spatial planning once created,
is actually deemed to be implemented.
And we need to actually have some flexibility.
And these, these ma matters are all interconnected
or interwoven because when we talk about spatial planning,
it then links to, uh, the point that, uh, Emily was making
before around how do we make sure if we're going
to recognize land as being suitable for food production,
that it's not then inadvertently, um, impacted by,
uh, future land use change and
or by the ability to actually access those resources
that make it productive in the first place.
So could there be quite a cost implication for growers
if this doesn't change?
Yes. Look, thank you. We will have to leave it there.
Thanks, Kate and Emily, um,
and for your submission, uh, lots in there
and, uh, you know, really well laid out submission.
So thank you very much for your time this morning.
Thank you. Um,
and we've got a bit of a theme running this morning
because, uh, fruit and vegetables
and, uh, food production, uh, which
of course is very important.
But, uh, we now welcome, uh, vegetables New Zealand.
Uh, welcome to the select committee this morning.
Obviously there we had a little bit of crossover there
with Horticulture New Zealand as well.
But, uh, looking forward to hearing from you.
Thank you for your submission.
You've got 20 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over.
Thank you very much. Um, good morning. I'm John Murphy.
I'm a vegetable grower
and I'm chair of Vegetables New Zealand.
Um, shortly I'm going to hand over to Vance Hodgson,
our resource resource management
advisor, who we have online.
Uh, and he will speak to the details of our submission.
And then to, uh,
my colleague Jay Clark from Woodhaven Gardens,
who will speak to some of the solutions we have
to the regulatory challenges
that his family's vegetable growing businesses faced over
recent years in Hoten Oil.
Um, we support
the submission from our colleagues at Horticulture
New Zealand, and we're looking forward
to giving you context on the RMA settings needed
for commercial vegetable growers
and how we see the proposed framework impacting New
Zealanders access to fresh, healthy food.
As commercial vegetable growers, we have the privilege to,
of contributing to New Zealand's access to fresh, healthy,
nutritious food while employing more than 5,500 people
and contributing significantly
to New Zealand's balance of trade.
The government's proposal is a good start
to support these things, but there are specific
aspects we need to advance.
We must achieve a nationally consistent approach
for commercial vegetable production,
and specifically, we must have the ability to rotate our,
our crops to ensure we can maintain best practice.
So I'll hand to advance now to go over our submission.
Hey, John. Good morning. All. Yes.
Um, my name is Vance Hor
and I'm a planning consultant based just outta, um,
so my career was with, uh, started
with former Franklin District Council.
And, um, and I continue to live
and work in an area that's characterized by a number
of key resource management issues associated
with primary production, urban growth, um,
highly productive land, water quality,
water quantity issues, and reverse sensitivity, uh,
and living and working in this area.
I have had a long association
with primary production sector, uh,
and I've been a planning witness on a number
of plan changes across the, the country for this sector.
And I guess I find this area of resource management, um,
really interesting, fascinating,
and I've seen the frustrations
that commercial vegetable growers, uh, have faced, uh,
in our current planning system is they've tried
to just go about their business
of producing food for New Zealanders.
Uh, and I agree with the statement of the submission
of vegetables in New Zealand,
that it's only been in recent years that
resource management frameworks have started
to recognize the national significance
of New Zealand's vegetable production system
to domestic food supply.
Uh, that has been my experience in countless plan changes
across the country, uh, arguing to ensure objectives
and policies, address the issue.
Methods enable the activity, uh, with,
with its particular needs, arguing for consistency
and regulation for artificial crop protection structures,
earthworks associated with erosion
and sediment controls, uh, bird scaring devices,
nutrient management regimes, access to water,
reverse sensitivity, et cetera, et cetera.
And it's been obviously time consuming, costly,
and the outcomes have been inconsistent across regions
and districts for an activity that
because of the resources that requires crop rotation needs,
uh, it doesn't limit itself to, to council boundaries.
And that's an important, uh, point
to recognize in terms of the growing system.
And, uh, as previous stated, vegetables,
New Zealand submission support some more fulsome
and detailed submission of Horticulture New Zealand.
And this submission is a submission
that just highlights some key matters for the committee's,
uh, consideration.
And I understand those, those, um, matters,
which are six key points have been passed
the committee in the handout.
But I'll just share my screen in regards to those matters.
I will talk very quickly to them so that we can get onto,
um, Mr. Clark and to the, um, submissions
of the, of the committee.
And, uh, let me Just share that.
Yeah, yeah.
We can't see your screen there, but,
Uh, requests sent to share,
Um, uh, clerks, we, we see that.
Okay. Um, yeah.
Does that come through? No, we can't. No.
Okay. Look, Maybe if you just carry on talking to it,
I'll, I'll just talk to those points.
Yeah. So there's six key points there.
Um, some of which have been covered, uh, by Kate Scott
and, uh, Emily in their submission this morning.
But the, the six key areas concern, firstly, the goals
of the planning bill and the natural environment bill, uh,
as what New Zealand has set out, uh,
as per the Vegetables New Zealand submission.
Um, these are the hawks that really set up the legislation
to enable those things that follow, um, to enable
and support the commercial vegetable
production activity in New Zealand.
And the comments in the vegetables New Zealand submission
replicate those of what New Zealand suggesting
that change could be made to planning bill Goal one A
regarding reverse sensitivity, which is the, the primary
and common concern for producers
and I think will be an effect, uh,
that will exist into our future planning system,
acknowledging that our rural environments are, uh,
characterized by a broad range of activities,
including a number of sensitive activities
that have established there through legacy planning,
be it subdivision or, or land use.
Uh, goal one c of the planning bill.
Uh, this was a matter that Emily covered in her comments.
We see there's some real benefit in clarifying
what a well-functioning rural environment is
and what we want to achieve.
There is a goal, uh, a new goal
for the natural environment bill relating to the supply
of fresh fruit and vegetables.
Uh, the second point covered in the submission,
ministerial powers, uh, again, we see
that embedding specific goals
that elevate primary production
and food supply values mitigates any significant shift in
planning direction into the future, such
that everybody will be required, uh, to still, um,
achieve the goals in future decision
making allocation of resources.
And covered by, um, Ms. Scott, again, in regard
to horticulture, new Zealand's concern about
market-based allocation.
Um, Jay Clark will probably comment on this,
but that is a significant risk
and concern for the vegetable growing sector, uh,
who are likely unable to compete in a,
in a pure market-based allocation framework.
Uh, natural resource levies, unsure about
how this might be implemented.
Again, a matter that, uh,
Ms. Clark will probably comment on,
but we do see this as a cost that's likely to be passed on
to domestic consumers of vegetables, survival water.
Mm-hmm. This scenario that I've been involved in,
in a number of plans around the country, uh, this is water
that's vital for food production and domestic food supply.
Yeah. Um, and we see that provision should be possible,
be made in the primary legislation to secure survival water
for crops for human consumption and spatial planning.
You like. From a planning perspective, I see this
as a significant step forward.
Um, the issue for the, uh, the, uh,
vegetable growing sector, again, is set out by, um,
Ms. Scott, uh, is
that spatial planning must be directly linked
to resource use and allocation, but it, uh, can't.
Um, but it cannot be a mechanism that creates a handcuff
that prohibits change.
There are some challenges
for spatial planning in our rural environment.
Uh, our rural environment is dynamic, particularly at
that peri-urban interface, which is where a lot
of our commercial vegetable production activity occurs,
which is often historical
because of the way our, our, uh,
urban centers established close to growing areas
that feed that population.
Um, but spatial planning a useful tool,
but can't be a static tool.
And with that, I'm finished and I'll pass on to Mr.
Jay Clark.
Right. Good morning everybody. Um, my name's Jay Clark.
I'm an owner director at Woodhaven Gardens in Levi.
Uh, Woodhaven Gardens is a large family owned
and run vegetable growing business.
Uh, we grow 24 different fresh cut vegetable crops
and grow about 10 to 15%
of New Zealand's fresh cut vegetables supply.
Um, well over 99% of that product we're really proud of
because it stays here in New Zealand
and it feeds New Zealanders.
And I think that's a really important point.
Um, you hear a lot around, uh, the regulatory
of the primary se regulation of the primary sector in terms
of export earnings and cost to compliance.
And for us as vegetable growers,
they're actually not the two big issues
because the product that we grow, we are really proud
that we use New Zealand's natural resources in terms
of our land and our water to grow healthy food
that feeds Kiwis and Kiwi families.
Uh, and it's not actually the cost
of compliance, it's the big barrier.
It's the fact that we cannot get consents
that enable us to operate.
So we're forced to operate in a legal gray area
where we have, uh, regional regulation that requires us
to have regional consents, uh, resource consents,
but we are not able to be granted them
because there's no practically achievable pathway
for us to be granted.
Those resource consents
and that environment has operated for,
well more than 10 years in the Horizons region under the
Horizons One plan.
And I know we have issues with several other growers
and several other regions around the country,
including Canterbury, uh, and,
and the Waikato under Plant Change one here.
Um, I think it's important to point out
that Woodhaven Gardens is a,
a multiple award-winning grower in terms of the fact
that we are a, a balanced farm environment,
regional Supreme Award winner.
We are the, a former WhatCulture New Zealand Environment
Award winner, and we're recognized nationally
and nation internationally as being, um,
a leader in sustainable vegetable production.
So we are not here asking for free rides.
We want practical solutions to be put in place
that enable us to grow this really important
food to feed our country.
Um, today as it stands under our plan change two, um,
under the horizon's, uh, regulation reform, um,
most growers in our region would be forced to either
increase their land holdings by over 30%,
which actually would increase adverse environmental effects
in other areas such as sediment loss and,
and carbon loss in order to meet nitrogen reduction goals
or reduce their production by 35%.
In order to achieve that, both
of those outcomes in an industry where there's rage
of thin margins in a highly competitive domestic
environment, would see it being unsustainable
for those businesses to continue, um, as a result
of highly complicated breakthrough environment In the
horror, we've seen an environment
where we had over 300 growers between Uck and,
and live in be reduced to under 30 today with really three,
only three that will continue to exist in,
into the future in, in any major size.
So the shrinkage within the industry has been huge, uh,
and really puts it through our ability to continue
to supply healthy food for New Zealand,
protect our national food security on top of the,
the inability to get land use
consents under the current framework.
We've also been unable to get,
get our water use consents renewed.
So we've, uh, gone
through all the paperwork over five years ago
to apply for those renewals.
We've spent in excess of $300,000 on consultants, not just
for us, but we have to pay for the council's consultants,
we have to pay for consultants for iwi hopper groups,
and we still have not had those water consents renewed.
I think it's really important to point out that in terms
of resource restriction for vegetable growing,
this doesn't affect yield.
This isn't like I just get a little less milk
like in a pastoral context.
Either we meet the crop demand for nutrient,
or we meet the crop demand for water,
or we do not get that crop in its entirety.
We will not have any marketable gu, it'll go to zero.
So not only is that a dire consequence to our business,
it's a dire consequence
to the food security for our country.
And it actually increases your environmental effect when we
take no crop off, because the biggest effects for,
for vegetable production in terms
of environmental impact is nitrogen losses.
And the biggest way to push that forward is
by reducing your crop take off
and allowing that dec decomposition of that crop
to release more nitrogen into the system.
So we get a really adverse outcome if we're
unable to get that crop off.
So when we come with really hard limits that, uh, uh,
don't allow growers to flex
and meet those crop needs, it demands
as the environment changes,
we really put at risk not only those growers businesses,
not only our food security,
but we increase the risk on the environment as well.
So I would like to to also point out
that alongside the highly productive land policy in these
over allocated catchments
with highly restrictive regulatory environments,
we've essentially handcuffed growers.
'cause we've said, like cater pointed out,
and Vance pointed out, essentially,
you must grow vegetables on this land,
but you're also not allowed to grow vegetables on this land.
So we have some of our most productive soils
where the next most logical use would potentially be housing
where you're told you're not allowed
to do either of those activities.
And that seems like a really perverse outcome that needs
to be addressed in the regulation.
Um, I'll finish off by saying, look,
the equation's really simple.
Um, if growers are unable to use our land,
including rotation, being able to, to rotate logically
around our catchments, meet the crop demand for nutrients
and water, and protect them from pests disease,
we simply cannot grow the healthy food for New Zealand
that New Zealanders require for their health and wellbeing.
This is not my opinion as a grower,
it's just basic scientific fact.
So we need an enabling regulatory environment that allows us
to do that so we can continue to provide New Zealanders
with a fresh access to fresh,
healthy vegetables at a reasonable price.
Brilliant. Thank you very much.
Uh, look, we have got quite a few
questions, so we'll start with
Rachel. Thank,
thank you. I'll be quick, uh, glad
that you like labor's enabling the supply
of fresh fruit and veggies.
Um, now just two questions
that you talk a lot about permitted activities,
but we just heard before, um,
from Kate Scott about the controlled activities.
I'm wondering if you have a view on the role
of controlled activities as an activity status,
and secondly, when you talk about survival water mm-hmm.
Are you just talking about for domestic product
or export product as well?
Look, um, I'll, I'll, I'll answer the one about, um,
water first.
Um, I think it's important to understand that, um,
unlike in a pastoral context,
you can't just bring supplementary feed on
or, you know, truck some water in or whatever.
If we don't get that water to keep that crop alive,
it will die in its entire tree.
And so that's why it's really important to understand,
understand that that applies for both export growers, um,
of, of canopy and tree crops mainly.
Um, and also for domestic food supply
for the export growers, they also lose their, um,
essentially their growing infrastructure
because they'll lose that tree or vine.
So they won't just lose that season's crop.
They will lose probably the ability to generate any crop
for five or six years if they, they lose that.
So they, it's important for, for both.
Could you repeat the first part of your question?
Uh, the, the first one was about activity status,
and you talked a lot about permitted activities,
but what about restricted discretionary activities
and controlled activities?
So the issue there, as Kate alluded to, is, um,
when those activities, when, when there's scope
for interpreting them in a particular way on a region
by region basis, that's where we've found that practically,
um, our growers have no pathway to consent.
So we want a really, really, um, we wanna really clarify
that going forward.
But, um, my own view is that, um,
permitted activity is of course what we want.
And, um, we real, we're not asking for a,
an open book on that.
We rely on our assurance system such as NZ gaps, um,
EMS, um, we want to do things properly
and to be able to prove that,
and we're making massive advances with our practices.
Um, thank you. Um,
Can I, do I need to add a bit on that?
'cause things quite hoarded,
we could live in a controlled activity environment depending
on what the controls are.
So, um, if, if you start to move into controls that
restrict the outcome effects,
those outcome effects are going
to vary based on the climatic conditions
year by year, by year by year.
And that's why it's been so problematic in those areas
that have put controlling conditions like that to date.
Mm-hmm. So if those controlling conditions were
that practice based
and we were evidencing
that we were hitting certain practice goals
through something like the EMS,
then we could live in a controlled environment.
Our preference would be for permitted activity status
to just reduce the compliance burden overall.
But we could move into the environment if the controlling
addition were achievable,
practically achievable for growers.
Look, thank you. Look, I'm, um, would like to jump
In quickly and just, um,
touch on the national policy statement on highly productive
lands because, uh,
this is obviously a very big topic in my region in Hawke's
Bay, obviously with the head of Tonga Plains Koi, um,
of course, where there's this balance between, you know,
protecting our food producing land, um,
but also obviously there's urban development
that's required as well.
But then you pointed out in your submission just then that,
uh, currently the regulation is kind of not allowing either.
Yes. And then in your submission you say
that it's proved more of a constraint than beneficial
to growers, and it's been used by regulator regulators
to frustrate and constrain primary production activities.
Yes. So can you just elaborate a little bit further on where
vegetables New Zealand stands on
the National policy statement?
On highly productive lands,
Where we stand is that we, we need the policy statement
to reflect enabling aspects
of highly productive land rather than restricting them.
Um, as of right.
So if we don't have the ability to, um,
feed our crops appropriately and
and grow our food, then there's no point, um,
protecting that land for us.
So we must have those enabling factors in place.
I, I think growers saw this as a, uh, originally as a right
to farm policy that would protect the enabling factors
that enabled us to farm.
So access to water, access to, to nutrient discharge, access
to cultivating our soils, et cetera.
It hasn't turned out to, to be
that you cannot grow anything.
If you've got the most perfect soil in the world,
but you're not allowed to use nutrient
and water, you won't grow a thing.
So then that land is no longer highly productive. Mm-hmm.
So if we don't protect the ecosystem that's required
to grow, there is no point in protecting this
underlying soils.
You're wasting your time.
So that policy does need to be tidied up to ensure
that it ties the ecosystem that's required to grow the food
to the, the land type as well.
Brilliant. Thank you. Uh, Ryan Hamilton has a question
and then we'll go to Lam. Well,
Thanks. Look, just quickly,
probably two subs, one on the back
of Catherine's question, and you touched
on highly producted land.
So am am I clear that we've got this, this hierarchy
of graphs have land at the moment,
but you're sort of hamstrung, handcuffed in the same purpose
because you're not fully enabled Correct.
Autonomously to do what you need to do. Yes.
And do you see a pathway in terms of this new bill
and legislation that would enable that?
Or you, do you see that or is it, would
It come to uncertain state
That come in the natural direction
Part? Correct. Yeah.
So if, if the, if the national direction
for vegetable growing, um, enables growers to,
to access the water, um, to discharge the nutrient
as required to meet crop demand, to growth crop,
then we have an architecture
that supports highly productive the protection
of highly productive land, um, to serve its purpose,
which is to use that land to grow food,
which is important for the country.
Okay. Without it, it doesn't.
Thanks. And, and the other one you touched on earlier,
the gray area of consenting, you sort of touched on that.
Um, what's the biggest bottleneck to that in terms of,
you know, you've had these five year
consent spending all this money.
What's, what's the quickest fix to that issue?
Uh, uh, it, it's, it's technically impossible.
So to give you some perspective,
currently under the one plan, we are only allowed
to discharge 20 kgs of nitrogen per hectare
for wood aven gardens, which is probably leading the way.
We would estimate that we would need somewhere between three
to five times the land area that we currently have.
So probably not a thousand hectares.
We need to find 2000 to 3000 hectares
to produce the same amount of crop to meet that metric. So
The discharge, um, criteria is, is out of whack,
Is completely out of whack
because it's pastoral focused, um, which represents 99%
of New Zealand sort of farming land use.
Um, and it is not industry specific
and there's been a real reluctance
for industry specific regulation.
What we also don't want
to do is have industry specific regulation in different,
that's different in different regions.
'cause you'll move around competitive advantage
and you'll damage New Zealand's food security.
So if you say the Terra region's got the,
the most advantageous regulations
and all the growing moves to Terra
and we get another cyclone, Gabriel,
this country doesn't have food.
So that's why it's really important that
that regulatory regulation for our industry,
which is highly domestically focused,
is nationally consistent to ensure
that competitive advantage isn't moving around regions
and damaging New Zealand's food security
as a result. Thank you.
Look, thank you. We are gonna have to leave it there.
We have gone over time. Uh,
we really do appreciate your time today.
Um, some really interesting takeaways there, um,
in relation to food security.
So, uh, yeah, appreciate that all the growers do as well.
So thank you. Thanks for
The opportunity speak. Yeah,
Right. We welcome
our next submitter, seafood New Zealand.
Thank you very much. So, uh, we're touching on all
of food groups this morning.
Lemme know if you need a sub,
You'll be fine.
So, uh, yeah, welcome to the select committee this morning.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us, so, uh, we'll hand it over
to you for your opening remarks and introductions
and then open it up for questions. Great.
Thanks very much. Um, Koto,
I'm the chief executive at Seafood New Zealand.
Now Seafood New Zealand is the industry pea body
for the commercial wild capture fishing industry.
Um, I'm joined today by Nick Gibbs,
who's a marine policy expert,
and also joining our representative organizations
who submitted similar uh, submissions to our own.
So can I introduce please, Mark Edwards,
who's the chief executive
of the Rock Lobster Industry Council,
and we also have Storm Stanley, who's the chair
of the Power Industry Council.
Now look, we are very grateful for this opportunity.
We are aware that we're on the clock
and we do want to save time for questions.
So our submission was substantial.
We're gonna take that as read.
Can I commend to you pages seven
and eight, which basically summarize the range of issues
that we've put in front of you.
Um, so as I say, short time, I'm gonna provide, uh,
some high level, um, overview
and then we're going to pass to you for questions
and I'm gonna get the team to jump in
and assist to ask those.
So in just this short couple of minutes to start with,
I wanna concentrate on our primary concern,
and that is removing the unnecessary duplication
between the bills and the Fisheries Act.
Now, removal of such duplication was one of the drivers
behind this bill in the first instance.
And I want to remind of, uh,
Chris Bishop's words when he first
introduced, um, this bill.
And he said, these bills are the country's opportunity
to break free from a system that has shackled us
with complexity, duplication, red tape and uncertainty
and confused accountability and decision making.
Now that was music to our ears,
and understandably, we had great, um,
great expectations of the bills.
Unfortunately, however, um, for the fishing industry,
the bills retain and perpetuate complexity duplication
and the confused accountability
that Chris Bishop talked about,
and in some respects, even worse than the RMA.
And I'm gonna touch on this later when we talk about some
of the safeguards that really need to be pulled through, um,
from the RMA to these bills.
So what do we mean about duplication?
Let's look first at the Fisheries Act.
This is an act to manage fishing.
Its purpose is to provide for utilization
of fish resources while ensuring sustainability.
Now this bit is really important.
Ensuring sustainability doesn't just mean sustainability
of harvested fish species.
It also means avoiding remedying
and mitigating adverse environmental effects of phishing.
That's really important. Now, the Phishing Act is
a lot like the IMA, it has a similar purpose
and it provides a complete package of tailor made tools
for decision making, implementation, monitoring,
and enforcement of all aspects of fisheries management.
And it includes, as I say, those environmental impacts.
Now in appendix two of our submission, you'll have seen
that we provide many examples of the regulations
that are made under the Fisheries Act
for managing the adverse effects
of fishing on marine biodiversity.
Now, the duplication arises
because under the natural environment Bill
regional councils are also able
to make rules controlling fishing.
Now look, stepping back just a little,
and this is important context.
From 1991 until the Titi Court
of Appeal decision in late 29, that is for almost 30 years,
it was understood that the environmental effects
of fishing were managed under the Fisheries Act
and the Fisheries Act alone, there was no role for the RMA.
In other words, a clean line existed between the acts.
Now, the moti decision changed that by saying
that councils control phishing under the RMA
provided they did not do it for Fisheries Act purposes.
So why is this problematic?
As I mentioned before, the purpose of the RMA
and the purpose of the, of the Fisheries Act are
so closely related that it's actually difficult,
if not impossible, to determine whether a particular role
controlling phishing rule, sorry, is made
for Fisheries Act purposes or for RMA purposes.
Now, to illustrate that,
and I've just handed one of those maps over there.
This, this appears in appendix one of our submission.
We provided an example, um,
to illustrate the extent of this overlap.
Now, the map on the left shows a large closure
to bottom trawling recently imposed
by the Waikato Regional Council under the RMA on the right,
we see an identical proposal made
by Fisheries New Zealand under the Fisheries Act.
There is virtually nothing to distinguish
between these controls, um,
other than the council saying that they're doing it
for RMA purposes and central government saying
that they're doing it for Fisheries Act purposes.
This excessive
and unnecessary degree
of duplication has not been resolved in the bills,
but instead has been perpetuated.
The main consequence,
and this is really important, is that every single rule
that is proposed by a council to control phishing will have
to be appealed
and tested in the courts to establish its legitimacy.
As the judge in moti said, each rule has to be.
And I quote, assessed on a case by case basis.
Now, the WAKATA rule
that I've just mentioned is currently under appeal
by 13 different parties.
Now that includes the fishing industry,
iwi environmental groups, the Council
and Central Government.
Now based on our experience, we anticipate that every party
will end up spending around $500,000 on lawyers
and experts expand that to 17 councils,
17 regional spatial plans
and 17 natural and environment plans.
And we are looking at absolutely huge costs.
This is such a waste of time
and resources that could be spent on achieving real
environmental outcomes.
And it's completely unnecessary
because the Fisheries Act has all the tools
to manage the environmental effects of fishing.
Now, we accept that people will have concerns about the
impacts of fishing on marine biodiversity, but we rec
and we recognize that improvements are necessary.
But those improvements should be made under the Fisheries
Act, not by establishing a parallel regime of regulation
by regional councils under the bills.
Now, just a really brief side note here, in part two
of our submission, we discuss a related consequence,
which is that the bills undermine Parliament's original
intent about how the marine
and coastal area, the Kotai Moana Act
deals with fishing rules.
Now, I'm not gonna go into that here now,
but we also welcome questions on that aspect as well.
So just to reiterate, the key problem duplication,
the consequence, enormous amounts of time
and resource are tied up in managing that duplication.
The solution. The solution we recommend is
to recreate the clean line that existed
between the Fisheries Act
and the RMA prior to the MOI decision.
In other words, all provisions relating
to the controller phishing should be removed from the bills.
Importantly, and again, I really wanna underscore this,
it will not create any gaps in marine
biodiversity protection.
If a regional council's plan
identifies a significant natural area, then the Minister
of Fisheries is already obliged under the Fisheries Act
to have regard to the plan provisions.
Now, we appreciate that reestablishing a clean line
between the Fisheries Act and the bills requires a
government policy decision and it's
therefore not something
that selecting necessarily will be
able to deliver on its own.
But we nevertheless urge you to raise it with ministers
because we believe our solution is the only one
that's consistent with the government's stated intent
of removing complexity, duplication,
unnecessary regulation and cost.
However, as you'll see from our submission in the event
that our clean line solution is not accepted,
our submission also recommends some amendments
to the bills drafting, for example, existing safeguards
that ex are currently in the RMA
should be carried through to the bills.
And I'll give examples of the requirement for councils
to assess the impact of a proposed rule on phishing.
And for the director general of MPI to be satisfied
that a proposed rule will not have an undue effect, um,
or adverse effect on fishing.
I'm almost there. We also make recommendations
to improve notification
of permit applications in the coastal Marine area
and to better provide
for integrated management across the Land Sea boundary.
And we're happy also to take questions,
um, on any of those issues.
But I'll conclude by reemphasizing
that our main recommendation is
that the unnecessary duplication between the bills
and the Fisheries Act should be re removed
by reinstating a clean line.
Um, now your questions please.
Brilliant. Thank you very much. We'll start
with Cameron Luxton, who has his hand up.
Ah, Thank you chair. Yeah.
Um, and thank you Fisheries New Zealand.
It is the Morty, uh, decision did confuse the heck out
of everybody in the Bay of Plenty.
And, uh, it's led to, as you say, duplication
and annoyance from all parties involved.
So the question is, uh, that came about, um,
because of a desire to protect reef structures
and ecosystems.
Do you think having, uh,
do you think the Fisheries Act would have sufficient
provision in there to take into account, um, things outside
what you would call the fisheries, say, um,
bottom structure protection, um, reef structure, if we were
to remove this from the Natural Environment Act,
would there be sufficient ability in the bill,
uh, in the Fisheries Act?
Sorry to take that into account.
Uh, yeah. Yes. If I could answer that question.
The Fisheries Act, um, has got really broad provisions
for avoiding remedying mitigating adverse effects
of fishing on the aquatic environment.
And the aquatic environment is defined very, very widely.
And it includes physical structures like reefs
or the bottom of the sea and so on.
So yes, the answer is yes,
the Fisheries Act could control that.
And okay. And then so to follow up, um, on that, you,
you've made the point that, um,
the minister should take into account
and regard regional council plans, uh,
when making a decision upon, um, say a reserve or,
or something like what we've seen in Morty, uh,
and outer reefs.
Is that, is that taking into account a regional plan,
still a duplicative as in, uh,
the Bail Planning Regional Council was taken in Environment
Court and repealed based on their plan?
Uh, would that still be part of this, even if it was
to be taken out and the minister was to take into account?
There still seems to be a duplicate, just
so in your suggestion, can you explain
to me why it's not duplicative?
So if, if there was a clean line between the Fisheries Act
and the resource management, uh,
and the Natural Environment Bill,
you still need those two pieces of legislation to speak
to each other and to be integrated.
So nothing falls through the gaps.
And so I think you would still need a provision in the
Fisheries Act, which requires the Minister of Fisheries
to have regard to
what the regional councils are saying in their planning
document, so that if
fishing is having an adverse effect on something
that the Regional Council wants to protect,
then the Minister of Fisheries can take appropriate action
under the Fisheries Act.
So we're basically not,
we're not saying phishing doesn't need to be regulated,
we're saying phishing needs
to be regulated under the Fisheries Act.
No, I completely understand. And
chima, I just have one more stuff.
I just, I think the part that I'm confused with is, uh,
the Morty decision was an appeal against
what the council had been doing.
I'm just, uh, how, how would that sort
of stop that from happening?
I mean, it was like, I don't like what was happening there,
but could we figure out a way for that to, like,
how is your suggestion stopping the appeal
of the regional plan?
It seems like it would still end up in the, in the court
If, if the natural environment Bill had a provision which
said that the council cannot make rules controlling
phishing, then the appellants would not be able
to appeal that.
Okay. Thank you. That's very clear. Yeah.
Thank you. We will now move to Rachel. Thank you.
Uh, this Matt brings back some. It does.
Um, but my question is just about that one
of the amendments, resource management amendments,
we had recently changed some of this interaction
between the RMA and the Fisheries Act.
How, what do you think of that
and in relation to this legislation?
Well, I mean, as we said, as Lisa said, our primary uh,
recommendation is to have the clean line
and the recommendation, the changes to the RMA,
which were made at the end of last year.
Is that what you're talking about? That's right.
That kind of, um, embedded the duplication between the RMA
and the Fisheries Act by making it explicit
that councils could make rules controlling
phishing under the RMA.
And those, those changes have kind
of been brought forward into the bill.
Mm-hmm. But some important bits of them have been omitted.
So, I mean, to be honest, I think that those changes
that were made at the end of last year were
incredibly bureaucratic solution.
Um, so they didn't really address the heart of the issue,
which is this overlapping jurisdiction
and the uncertainty about the legitimacy
of a rule controlling phishing.
Instead they built these yeah, bureaucratic processes.
Your council's gotta go through all this assessment process.
The direct to general of NPI has got
to do a concurrence decision,
like it's all this extra complexity
rather than addressing the root of the problem,
which is this uncertainty
because of the overlap of the two pieces
of legislation. Cool.
Thanks. Thank you. Uh, we'll move to Land Farm
Koto. Thank you so much
for your submission today.
Um, I wanted to pick up on the aspect of your submission
around actually managing the adverse effects from land.
And, you know, you've got some,
you've really clearly pointed out how so much of
what impacts the marine environment are basically, um,
the failure of land use controls.
What is your perception about where this bill is in terms of
environmental limits on land being set at
that regional level at a case by case basis,
essentially rather than national direction?
Can you help us understand, uh,
your perspective from the marine environment?
That's a tricky question for us to answer
'cause it's not really a issue
that we've really looked at too much in terms of the,
the way the bills work.
We've more focused on what are the impacts on fishing in the
marine environment, but in terms of how you sort
of started off asking that question about, you know,
land-based effects, um, influencing the marine environment.
I think the way that the two bills are separated into the
planning bill, which deals with land stuff
and the natural environment bill, which deals
with the marine environment,
there's not good horizontal linkages between them in terms
of planning mechanisms that would deal with adverse effects
that originate from the land,
but have their adverse effect in the sea.
Um, because there are, you know, two different acts
and two different planning authorities dealing with it.
And so we, uh, one of our recommendations is
that the regional spatial plan could be a good mechanism
for providing a better integration between
what happens on land and what happens in the sea.
Uh, I probably haven't answered your question very well,
but that's really what we've been saying about that.
Thank you. Uh, look,
Ryan Hamilton's got the next question. Oh,
Thanks Chair. This has
sort of been tra traversed a bit,
but just for clarity, um,
you've made your point really clear around a clear line
between the Fisheries Act
and the new bill that's, that's really clear.
Um, but you also talk about councils have, would,
I know I'm paraphrasing,
but have they overreached in terms of, you know,
making things complex?
Is your view that they should be out of it or altogether
and it should just hang in primary legislation
or is there some space for appropriate nuanced secondary
legislation but it needs some clarity
or tidy up in terms of jurisdictions?
That's A good question. We really think council should
not be involved in managing fishing,
but that should be done by the ministry
for primary industries under the Fisheries Act.
And that was the situation, as Lisa said, from 1991 right
through until 2019 when the Morty decision was in place,
fishing was only managed under the Fisheries Act
and completely managed under the Fisheries Act.
And that is really the situation we want to return to.
So regional councils would not have a
role controlling fishing.
Hmm,
Thank you. Look, I
just want to jump in
because you have talked about duplication and complexity
and the new system, you know, for,
for you causing more duplication and complexity.
Can you give a tangible example of
where you think this would be the case, just so
that we can understand?
Well, I think that the, um, the map which,
which Lisa handed around Yeah. Shows that,
But like it's specifically like if there was a specific
case at the moment that you feel, um, you know, would go
through more duplication compliance cost
to the points that you are making. Just,
I guess we can only go from what's happened in the last
few years since Motd
and the regional council planning process
that we've been dragged into necessarily.
So in, in some cases it's been councils
that have proposed rules, often it's been other groups
that have proposed rules.
But as a result of that, we've had
to spend an enormous amount of time and resources
and the malborough planning process
and the Northland planning process now in
Waikato and in the Bay planning.
So in each case where there is a new planning process,
it seems ultimately that a whole lot of issues will emerge
for fishing as a result of this overlap and duplication.
And that'd been very resource intensive for us.
The Northland proceedings lasted nearly three years
and um, that as, uh, Lisa
summarized our costs alone in participating in all
of the stages of that process, both mediation,
very extended mediation,
and uh, ultimately the environment court process
were in excess of half a million dollars, which is,
which is a lot of, and weeks if not months of work
just in one council plan.
And as Lisa's submission pointed out there,
there are a number lined up as they come up for renewal.
And at the moment we are facing the prospect of having
to spend that sort of time
and resources in every planning process.
Yes. Um, no, we understand.
Look, I've got one last question from HOA who has a hand up
and then we'll have to wrap it up.
Thank you for sharing some of the, um, challenges
that you've experienced in the planning process
and, um, being from Taito, I know the complexity
of the challenge for what came into the Bay of Islands
and um,
but I wanted to unpack, uh, the macca, um,
component of your submission
and uh, where you talk about the original intent of the act
and you have proposed, uh, around CMT or customer
and marine title holders in their plans
and their potential impacts.
Can you develop that a little bit further to understand, um,
your thinking and positioning on that?
Sure. Um, I'm not sure how familiar everybody here is
with the, um, maca Act,
but um, you know, so customer marine title can be granted
under the Maca Act and the Maca Act gives customary marine
title holders a a set of rights.
One of those rights is a right
to prepare a planning document for the CMT area
and the planning document, um, sets out the CMT groups
and aspirations for the area, their objectives
and strategies and so on.
And the Maca Act describes what the scope of that document,
the planning document can be
and it can include anything that is regulated under the RMA
or now under the natural environment bill.
So at our concern is that at the time
the Maca Act was enacted in 2011,
the RMA did not include control of phishing and
therefore CMT planning groups in their CMT groups in
their planning document could not include Fisheries Matters
in their CMT planning document.
But because of the changes that were made to the RMA
and now through the bill phishing is now in scope
of the bill and therefore in scope
of the CMT planning document.
And that that has had the effect of sort of inadvertently
expanding the scope of the rights which were,
which are associated with the granting
of customer marine title.
And if you read the Maca Act, you can see that
the intent of Parliament was
to carve out fisheries issues from the Maca Act, partly
because fisheries issues had already been settled
through the Maori fishery settlement.
But these changes to the RMA
and now the bill have reinserted fisheries issues kind of
by a sideways door back into the MACCA Act.
And it's important because, uh, under the bill council's,
regional councils have to, um, what is the wording,
recognize and provide
for matters in the CMT planning document recognize
and provide for is a very active, um, statutory requirement.
It actually means the council has to do something about it.
It's not like they can just weigh it up
and say, no, we're not gonna do anything about it.
They actually have to do something about it.
And so if a CMT group has in their planning document, um,
strategies and objectives about we don't want any commercial
fishing in our area 'cause it's inconsistent
with our tikanga, then the council actually has
to give effect to that in their regional planning documents.
And we think that that goes way beyond
what Parliament originally intended in relation
to the Maca Act.
Look, thank you very much.
We are going to have to wrap it up there.
We have gone over time, but we thank you, uh, for your time
and insights today.
Uh, yeah, really interesting.
So thank you very much. Thank you very much.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Look, we will now, um, move on to our next submitter,
which is Greenpeace.
Uh, we'll welcome you up to the table here
and I'd also just like to, um,
acknowledge have a north high school
who are in the room today.
Uh, it's great to see, uh,
schools getting involved in the democratic process
and seeing it firsthand here.
Plenty fee officials to come up here. Then I can
See there's at least one in The room.
The, um, uh, fee officials
and fee officials when I come to the desk,
if you wash at the back if you
want to, if you want, you're right.
Okay, very, very good.
But yeah, no welcome and um, welcome to Greenpeace.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us this morning, so, uh,
we'll hand it over to you for your introductions
and opening remarks and I'm sure
there'll be plenty of questions.
So thank you Koto.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Genevieve Tupe
and I am Pres presenting, um, on behalf of Greenpeace Alt
the Bills before you are far reaching
and hugely consequential for roa
because if an enacted,
they will replace our country's main
environmental protection law.
The RMA. It is our view
that taking together these bills not only weaken
existing environmental protections in the RMA,
they make it harder, not easier for regulators to respond
to the ecological and climate crises facing us.
Therefore, Greenpeace opposes the natural
environment and planning bills.
The government's own reports consistently show
that polluted drinking water, dirty rivers eroding top soil
collapsing biodiversity
and climate driven disasters continue to escalate.
We see evidence of the degraded
and deteriorating state of New Zealand's environment,
not only in these reports but around us every day.
It is vital that our environmental protection law is
strengthened so that it re it restores
what has been damaged, prevents further harm,
and prepares our communities
for the climate challenges ahead.
Our written submission goes into detail on the wide ranging
ways that these bills weaken our existing environmental law.
In this oral submission, I only have time
to focus on the most concerning proposals.
So firstly, these bills propose that the public would have
to start paying compensation
to companies when environmental rules restrict
the use of their property.
These compensation clauses are unjust
and will drive mass regulatory retreat
because councils will be forced under these proposals
to choose between weakening
or abandoning environmental protections.
Or they can proceed, in which case they will face
strategic litigation by companies wanting
to maximize their compensation
and ultimately have to pay out compensation claims
that will take potentially capped public funds
away from maintaining essential services like sewage
infrastructure for example.
There are already sufficient safeguards
for landowners in section 85 of the RMA
where the environmental court can direct a rule, be amended
or land acquired if it is rendered
incapable of reasonable use.
The bills introduced two new
and unprecedented compensation pathways.
The general pathway applies to all environmental rules
and is triggered where a rule
severely impair the use of land.
The specified topic pathway applies
where there is just a significant impact on property
and covers protections from land-based indigenous
biodiversity to sites of significance to Maori
and many other topics.
In both cases, councils may be required
to compensate companies
where environmental protections affect land value
or limit development potential.
The minister has publicly confirmed that in gisborne rate,
payers may possibly be forced to pay compensation
to foreign owned forestry companies for stronger rules
to manage forestry slash and erosion.
Is that fair to the victims of site fund?
Gabriel Will regulatory retreat from forestry controls
and inappropriate land use prepare us for the next cyclone
that will inevitably hit many other essential
protections, could trigger compensation and
therefore be weakened or abandoned.
Environmental regulations exist to protect nature
and to prevent companies and individuals from imposing costs
and risk risks onto the wider public.
These clauses, however, are only concerned
with the impacts on the regulated party
and are silent on the impacts on nature.
The public and other property owners
who will be left footing the bill
for these compensation clauses in more ways than one.
Let me give you a clear example.
Rules that protect native vegetation cover
and upper catchments would trigger compensation
and most likely regulatory retreat.
But these rules are needed
to ensure heavy rainfall does not result in flooding
and debris damaging downstream properties and ecosystems.
Without these rules, damage is almost inevitable.
Despite what these bills might have us believe, rights come
with responsibilities.
Individuals are not incorporations, are not entitled
to harm nature and pollute the environment.
So when restrictions are placed on them for the good
of society, there is no justification
for compensation to be paid.
Requiring the public to pay
for environmental regulations is not only unjustified,
it is perverse, and we strongly oppose it.
All compensation clauses must be removed.
Clause 1 2 8 of the nib,
the Wildlife Act override must also be removed.
New Zealand already has the highest proportion
of threatened indigenous species in the world.
Extinction is permanent.
Once a species is gone, it is gone forever.
Yet clause 1 2 8 would waive the requirement for companies
to obtain a Wildlife Act permit from dock to kill
or harm protected native wildlife, allowing councils
to authorize that through the planning system.
Instead, docs specialist expertise
and national conservation oversight would be removed.
The clear protective purpose
and safeguards of the Wildlife Act would be bypassed.
Decisions would instead sit within the much more enabling
and permissive planning system.
In practical terms, it is our view
that this will make it easier for companies
to obtain permission to kill and harm Kiwi
and other endangered protected wildlife official.
A advice obtained under the OIA confirms these risks.
DOCK and MFE warned that this proposal could lead
to less effective wildlife protection,
reduced legal coherence conflict
with treaty obligations in the Conservation Act,
and might lead to legal challenges
after the neighbor is enacted cause 1 2 8 must be removed.
These bills also propose
to hamstring regulators from putting in place direct
controls on HA harmful land use activities
and polluting in inputs
and capping outputs such as nitrogen discharge discharges.
These rules are collectively referred to in the NIP
as resource caps under the RMA.
Councils can impose resource caps,
but clauses 60 to 65
of the NIP introduce significant barriers that will restrict
and may prevent them from doing so.
For example, councils can avoid using resource consent caps
under these bills if they consider them not
effective or feasible.
Or not feasible
because the resource is affected by a range
of different causes.
Almost all major environmental problems
have multiple causes.
This undefined and vague drafting
therefore creates a broad escape route from effective
regulation and gives industries greater grounds on which
to challenge resource ca caps
and prevent them being imposed
once it is deemed not feasible to use a resource cap
as a standalone measure, the N makes it almost impossible
for them to be used at all by forcing councils
to first prove that all other non-regulatory measures
will be insufficient.
A credible environmental law must include clear
and enforceable rules
that directly restrict harmful activities.
So all restrictions on the use
of resource caps need to be removed.
Finally, these bills strip current environmental protections
of any legal certainty going forward
by replacing the RMAs single environmental purpose
with multiple competing goals
that have no statutory hierarchy under the bills.
A set of weak and incomplete environmental goals in the NIB
are to be weighed against economic
and development goals in the planning bill, which
with conflicts resolved at the minister's discretion.
Not only is there no statutory requirement
to prioritize ecological limits
or the life supporting capacity of nature
before commercial profits, there is even an opt-out clause
for the minister when making NA National Instruments
that not all goals need
to be achieved in all places at all times.
Furthermore, the NIB only requires decision makers to seek
to achieve its goals, which is unacceptably weak direction.
The RMA requires decision makers to recognize
and provide for matters of national importance.
The goals in the nib are incomplete
and they're dangerously silent on key issues, including one
of the most pressing issues facing
and the younger generation sitting behind me.
Climate change, every additional ton
of greenhouse gases emitted, worsens climate impacts,
including the more frequent
and intense flooding that communities are
already experiencing.
Climate mitigation should clearly be central
to our primary environmental law,
but these, uh,
these bills should embed decarbonization into our planning
framework, guiding decarbonization
and transport construction
and energy systems in a transition away from high emissions
rural land uses such as intensive dairying.
Instead, these bills do not require greenhouse gas emissions
to even be considered at all in planning
or consenting decisions.
If you are not yet convinced
that these bills weaken legal environmental protections,
then look no further to clause than clause 86,
even though we already have a fast track approvals Act.
Clause 86 creates another consenting pathway
for significant infrastructure that breaches
or is likely to breach environmental limits.
The term significant infrastructure is undefined
and is left to the minister's discretion.
It is not restricted to essential public works
and could include private irrigation schemes,
critical minerals mines,
or other projects that serve a narrow group of people
and their commercial interests.
There are other issues outlined in our submission in more
detail that have contributed to our opposition
to these bills, which I will
touch on a couple of those briefly.
The bill's narrow Maori participation
and weaken the role of ity
or TGI in environmental decision making.
They remove the operative treaty clause in section eight
of the RMA and replace it with a procedural checklist.
The Maori interest goal, like the environment goals,
can be overridden by economic and development priorities.
We oppose this. Titi must sit at the heart of our planning
and environmental laws in a meaningful and operative way.
Finally, actually, finally this time,
these bills significantly restrict public participation
and limit who can appeal on, uh, consents
or plans and on what grounds.
This will make it harder for communities
and environmental watch dogs to challenge harmful projects.
The likely result will be poorer environmental outcomes,
greater conflict
and reduced public confidence in the system.
We recommend these restrictions are removed
and current levels of public participation in legal standing
under the RMA are retained.
In closing, these bills represent a major step
backwards for aoa.
They provide industries with the exact tools they need
to further delay regulatory action, enabling them
to continue damaging the environment while pushing the
escalating costs of their harm onto the public.
AOA can and should be a country that protects its rivers,
its wildlife, and its people.
We have defined ourselves on the world stage as a country
that values fairness, a country where we know
that rights come with responsibilities to each other
and to the environment on which we
and future generations ultimately depend.
But instead of reflecting those values, instead
of protecting and restoring the environment,
these bills protect corporate property rights at the direct
expense of nature and the public interest.
And nowhere is that made more explicit than in the corporate
compensation clauses.
We urge the select committee to reject these bills.
Do not let today's political decisions cause kiwi
or other native species to be lost forever.
Do not let today's political decisions
deprive future generations of the clean water,
fertile soils, habitable climate,
and thriving ecosystems
that are essential to their survival.
Thank you for your time and attention.
Um, I'm happy to answer any questions.
Thank you, Genevieve. Look, we'll
Go first to Rachel.
Thank you. Thanks for such a thorough submission as well.
Um, and I agree with, um,
or share the concern, shall we say anyway,
but this is just a little question
and in your submission, you talk a lot about resource caps
and you just mentioned that and how it's hard, um, to,
to get through that process.
And, uh, you give the example of the nitrogen cap being,
you then talk about direct controls
and how direct controls can be useful
and that the nitrogen cap is an example of that.
I was wondering if you have other examples.
If, if you were in charge
of resource management in
New Zealand, what would you be doing?
Well, I think, uh, just a a few weeks ago, uh,
environment, Southland produced a report highlighting the
very severe nitrate contamination
that Southland is experiencing, which is exposing
around 15,000 New Zealanders to, um, high, uh, exposure
to high levels of nitrate in their drinking water.
Now, the primary causes of
that are urine from intensive dairying
and synthetic nitrogen fertilizer.
So we already have a synthetic nitrogen fertilizer cap in
New Zealand that has been set nationally.
That's far too high.
But, um, since that was set, there is evidence
that nitrogen pollution, um, has declined as a result.
But we do not yet have a moratorium on new dairy conversions
on leaky soils,
and that is something we urgently need to see.
Leaky soils are not appropriate
for intensively stopped dairy cattle
because the nitrogen leeches through the soil
and it gets into the groundwater, which then we drink.
And as that report from environments Southland
and as, uh, evidence from Canterbury
and other areas shows nitrate contamination is
worsening in our drinking water.
And it's not like pathogens, it's not easy to get out.
You can't just boil it. Uh, it's very costly
to remove nitrate.
Um, and we may not even be seeing, uh, the, the impacts of
that showing up today because there's a lag time.
So we are expecting that to continue increasing,
but uh, before it gets better.
Um, so we need to see, for example,
a moratorium on new dairy conversions set regionally in
those places where, uh,
those leaky soils just cannot support
intensive dairying, for example.
Thank you. Look, we'll now move to Cameron Luxton.
Oh, thank you chair. Um, Genevieve, uh, there's,
there's a lot of money being spent in New Zealand.
We've heard it from previous submitters on consenting
and permitting regimes, um, multiple payments
to multiple parties for, for, um, litigation.
And I, I think my question to you is,
if we've got an implicit cost that's happening, um,
if we could make it explicit, do you think
that would lower the cost and
therefore provide more resources to things like, uh,
mitigation and protection?
Or do you think that, uh, we should continue with a regime
where people, um, need permitting, um, instead
of making explicit through compensation?
Sorry, I'm not sure I understand the question.
Can you repeat it? Uh,
That's all right. Yeah, so I'm
trying to say, uh, we've heard from submitters
that we have a situation that's expensive, costly,
and duplicative that leads to a lot
of resources being funneled into consenting and permitting.
Do you feel that making the costs explicit
through things like, uh, compensation
or you were calling it corporate, um, uh,
corporate compensation I believe you were using,
but regulatory takings and,
and, uh, do you think making
that explicit would lower the cost
and leave more resources being able to be used
for things like protection and conservation?
I, I don't think there's any evidence suggesting
that would be the case.
And I just go back to the core principle here.
Um, regulations exist to protect nature
and to prevent companies from imposing costs, uh,
and risks on the public and on other property owners.
Um, they're, you mentioned regulatory takings, um,
and they're, these compensation clauses are called
regulatory relief in the bills.
Okay. But regulations are not a taking,
they are not a burden on companies requiring relief.
They are a benefit to society,
and they should never trigger compensation.
Uh, okay. I'll leave it there.
Chair, let you go to another question.
Thanks, Cameron. We've just got time for one more.
I'll go to Land Farm
Qua. Jen, thanks
for your submission.
Um, I wanted to pick up on your very,
you very clearly pointed out the, I guess, missing
and silent parts of these key environmental bills.
And you pointed very clearly to the lack
of climate change mitigation in terms
of controlling emissions
and also concerns about lack of environmental bottom lines.
What about, do you think there's any
moral justification if this is really going to be this fit
for purpose, you know, next generation, uh,
resource management system for neglecting to
talk about or refer to in the goals, the rights
and needs of future generations?
Yeah, I think I've only mentioned the one, um, part
of the goals that was incomplete
or poorly worded, which was around climate change.
But, um, in our submission, we, uh,
outline several other areas which the goals are silent on,
um, or problematically worded.
Um, there is a very clear, uh, prioritization
of property rights, um, in these bills.
Um, but the rights of future generations to clean water
and a healthy environment are not included in the goals.
Um, the goals don't reflect, uh, the huge amount
of biodiversity that has already been lost.
They seek no net loss in biodiversity that
that sets up, um, offsetting, uh,
an offsetting regime which will allow more harm
and more loss of biodiversity when,
as I mentioned in the submission,
we already have the highest proportion
of endangered species in the world.
We can't afford no net loss in biodiversity.
We must be seeking a net gain.
Um, and there are, there are several other issues, uh,
which are not addressed in the bill.
Um, because instead of prioritizing the rights of, of people
to a healthy environment, they prioritize the rights,
um, of property owners.
Um, and they allow all environmental goals, um,
and the Maori interest goal to be overridden by economic
and development goals.
Um, there is no statutory certainty that the goals
as incomplete and weak as they are, will even be adhered
to in our planning system going forward.
Look, thank you very much.
We are gonna have to wrap it up there.
We have gone over time, but we appreciate your time today
and of course, your very thorough submission and passion.
So thank you. Thanks.
So we will, uh, now call up our next submitter,
the poi Poya, uh, limited,
and I believe we've got Tina with us today.
Welcome, welcome to the Select Committee.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over
to you for your introductions
and then open it up for questions.
Um, lovely to be here.
Uh, happy that you have given us the chance
to talk to you today.
Um, I just guess it would be helpful to give introductions.
Um, my name is Tina Perro. I'm an environmental planner.
I'm from ua, all the tribes of Turga.
Um, um,
and I've been an environmental planner for close
to 30 years now, particularly focused on issues for T
and uh, for Maori and Iwi in this space.
I had a whole lot of notes, um,
but I thought I would start by just saying my job
for the last 15 years has been helping iwi
and hapu, uh, often post settlement governance, um, agencies
to look at legislation that the crown provides to iwi
and hapu around environmental issues.
How I've looked at that role over the last 15 years is
that I polish poop.
The crown often gives me a piece of poo,
which is often the legislation changes largely
for the last 20 years, has been changes to the RMA
and I polish that poo.
I put some sparkles on it, I make it shiny,
and I hand it back to my people
and I say, this is the best I can get your
poo, but it's still poop.
This government has given me diarrhea
and I can't polish diarrhea.
And I want it to be explicit about it
because I don't think the select committee
or even the government understands how deeply triggering
these changes have been to Maori over the last three years,
particularly not just,
but in every facet of our participation in this country.
So it has been very difficult for my whanau to again,
rise up and write submissions for this particular piece
of legislation from the day
that the coalition government came in.
I as an expert in resource management planning
and law, I'm not a lawyer, I am a geographer,
but an expert in this spaces have noted some keytones
to the, to the legislation that has been put through
that we're discussing today.
The first is the misunderstanding that the key issue
to the effectiveness
and the efficiency of the resource management system is
somehow to be blamed on Maori
and iwi participation in the system.
That is a myth. Mm-hmm.
I'm also the chair of the Lake Temple Forest Trust,
of which we own 35,000 hectares
of predictive land in the central North island,
a large Maori trust incorporation.
We have 15,000 owners.
So I understand the tension between economic outcomes
and environmental, uh, safeguarding.
What I will say is that the tone
of this grossly misunderstands again, how important iwi
and hapu are to not only the resource management spaces
as a whole, but protection of the environment
for the long term and for the economic opportunity
of this country going forward.
I work across a range of agribusiness spaces,
and I know that our markets are seeking people
who understand that environmental, you know,
safeguards must be at the core of what we do.
This law will take away those, those protections
and hide it under words that have no power,
and it will restrict us in protecting not only our
environment going forward, but the markets
and the tourism opportunity that we, we tend to lean on
so heavily in this country.
I will take you now to some of the key issues
that I've raised in my submission.
The first is the RMA and how it works with part two.
And so some of you may not be aware how part two works
and how it's connected to treaty settlements.
So this government has specifically said
that they will protect treaty settlements
and uphold treaty settlements,
but this current drafting
demonstrates that that will not happen.
So if you think about part two of the RMA as a cake,
and that cake has some icing on it, when Iwi
and Hapu were negotiating directly
with the crown on treaty settlements, the crown said to Iwi
and Hapu, you have the part two
of the Resource Management Act,
which is six E seven A, and eight.
And those things are foundational on the foundation
of which your settlements will be negotiated.
So it's the cake, right?
That cake in part two was open to every I and UR
and guaranteed our participation in
the resource management system.
Now that participation is, is clearly articulated there
and is a catchall across the entire
resource management framework.
Now, what this government is saying is
because it has a single clause
that says it will uphold Trudy settlements,
that they will uphold Trudy settlements.
But by removing part two
and not replacing part two with an equivalent set of clauses
that are the same effect as part two,
you are breaching every single iwi
and HARU treaty settlement in one stroke.
Now, think of the specific, uh, clauses
that are negotiated in a treaty settlement between the crown
and iwi around environmental issues
that then is merely the icing.
So what you're saying is you're gonna take away the cake
and you're gonna say, we're gonna uphold the icing,
but we are not gonna give you the fundamental foundation
upon which you negotiated in good faith a treaty settlement,
a treaty settlement with iwi and hapu.
So you have breached every treaty settlement,
and this government has lied about that
by saying they'll uphold it, when in fact they're not.
And really all you're giving my people
with their cake is diabetes.
You're not actually helping us to uphold the arrangements
that you directly negotiated with those iwi and hapu,
and you are changing them arbitrarily.
You will see iwi and hapu take this government to court
and you will hold up the things that you're
so focused on making more efficient.
Now, those key points are important
because I think there's a gross misunderstanding of
what this looks and feels like on the ground.
So without part two of the RMA, what the MBA says is
that we will narrow the impact, the participation,
the engagement, and the operations
of resource management in our own and in our own regions.
Now, by changing the clauses to in this legislation,
it cannot change the fact that ORI exists, irrespective
if it is noted in the legislation in a specific manner that
Titi Foundation cannot be ignored, merely
because this particular government is seeking
to exclude Maori from decisions that are important as,
as honorable treaty partners to share.
There are some key amendments that I wanted to focus on
that I have put into my, um,
into my submission for your consideration.
The first is around changing the Maori goal
and the list of nine goals
that the government is, uh, proposing.
Now, the wording as it sits narrows Maori into
what I would call a reservation status, saying
that the only way in which Maori can participate in the
resource management system is on lands
that they have interest in.
And that is to be defined by the Crown and not by Maori.
And that is unacceptable.
So I've put into my proposal some amended wording
that essentially takes six e seven a and eight
and creates a goal that achieves that equivalency
to be replacing the Maori goal that currently exists,
which narrows the impact
of Maori participation in the system
and fails to uphold treaty settlements.
I would say too, that there are many unsettled iwi already
in this country that are still trying to have open,
honest fear
and equitable conversations
with the crown on treaty settlements today.
And this also sets to undermine their participation
and fair negotiation around treaty settlements if part two
or its equivalent no longer exists in the system.
The next key point I wanted to raise is national direction.
This is particularly important for iwi and hapu.
I can give you hundreds of examples of councils
who have created longstanding strong relationships with iwi
and Hapu in their own regions.
For my iwi alone, one of them, ya, we own 65%
of the entire topo district.
The late forest trust of which I'm the chair
of is the single biggest rate payer in the to district.
There is no way we are going to remove
or roll back engagements that we've got with council
that rest on long-term relationships
that we have built over the last close 200 years.
This year, the Tu fa Maori Trust board celebrates its 100th
anniversary of engagements with the councils
and local government.
And its all its forms into fare to since 1926
of which my great-grandfather was part of.
When you look at national direction,
what it creates is a lock.
It essentially says that
what is drafted in national direction, not by iwi and habu
and not by the communi, the community at a whole
will be applied to every council
and that will enable that lock to occur.
So if at national direction, the ministry
for the environment deems that engagement with iwi
and hapu is inappropriate or should be narrowed,
or that councils must have a lesser engagement with,
with iwi and hapu on the ground, if it's deemed
to happen in national direction,
councils must apply it in place.
That means the flexibility and the ways in which iwi
and Hapu can participate with councils is restrained.
And so we wanna make sure
that national direction particularly gives te, sorry,
gives teeth to Iwi
and Hapu who are working in good faith with their councils.
Also enabling national direction to have very clear
and binding direction where Iwi
and Hapu are engaging
with the crown on national direction to occur.
And the technical advisory groups,
which the Crown is looking to establish
but is very fuzzy within the, the rules
are given clear teeth so
that we can have a technical advisory group for Maori issues
appointed by II
and Hapu to be able to engage
with the Crown at a national level to ensure no locks at
that level, disadvantage iwi and Hapu
and their flexibility on the ground.
I also want to focus on iwi participation agreements.
So things like now these are also essential
to ensure that iwi
and Hapu can create longstanding, durable, efficient
and effective relationships
between councils and Iwi F Place.
At the moment, what is proposed by the Crown is
that only those that exist will continue
and there will be no further, uh, opportunity for Iwi
and Hapu to negotiate man agreements.
Now I'll give you a very brief example of one that works ma
agreement with the Topo District Council.
It has been going for close to four years.
We have been able to participate well in our community in GY
in the central north island on all matters pertaining
to council, um, influence on the township.
We have a joint committee, we share our decision making.
We work together closely.
KO is also one of one
of the largest landowners in the GY Township.
And we are also the holder of a iwi, uh,
of a Hapu treaty settlement that was put forward
to the crown and agreed in 1998.
All of these things have created a great
outcome for our town.
We get to appoint representatives for us and our hapu
and the council appoints through the community,
their representatives.
We have been working well for the last four years.
We have created amazing, uh, planning, award-winning, uh,
playgrounds and parks.
We are looking now at creating new gym in our community.
I just wanna be clear that by narrowing the influence
and participation of key constituents of a community, IE iwi
and hapu, you are being focused purely on the people
that you think are important
and not my people who are important,
but are seen as second class citizens in our own homes.
And I have to say I'm the 28th generation of
I have been living and my family have been living in
for close to a thousand years.
What do you think? You have the right to tell us how
to participate in our own community
with people we have grown up with and loved.
And you think you can narrow the
flexibility to do that at place.
Now I don't know what everyone else does,
but I know my community, we work closely with our people,
whether they are Maori or non-Maori.
During COVID, my hapu went out and looked
after everybody in.
We didn't care who they were,
but the fact that the government is creating a system
to narrow the flexibility of arrangements
that we make in our own home
is frankly unacceptable.
My last key point, uh, that I wanted to make today was
around making sure that iwi
and Hapu have the right to properly negotiate
and uphold our treaty settlements.
With the crown currently under the MBA,
it suggests a two year limit on the engagements
between the Crown and Iwi
and Hapu to uphold treaty settlements within this new space.
That is not going to work.
And I'll give you the reasons why.
Firstly, there are over a hundred treaty settlements
that are current currently in in place.
These were negotiated by the crown.
These were created by the Crown
and negotiated in good faith with iwi and hapu.
Your ministries could not manage the engagement required
and the complexity required to uphold treaty settlements
and how they will be given effect in this new set
of pieces of legislation.
Frankly, your ministries don't have the technical expertise
to do it, nor do they have the resourcing
to participate fairly with every single iwi who is
of the same ilk.
There is no iwi. It's larger or better or more important.
All of us deserve the same level of resourcing
and the same expectation of having a ministry
or set of ministries that can uphold those settlements.
Well, I do not believe
that under the current resourcing regime
nor the current capacity regime of the crown,
that you are prepared for the wave of iwi who will come
to the door to say, we want you
to uphold our Trudy settlement.
And in closing, I think one of the key bits for me has been
around this space is that it has been disheartening to see
a focus on systemic racism, determining how Maori iwi
and hapu can participate in a system
that we have spent a thousand years protecting.
We are the ones that spend our own money
to defend against people who are polluting our waterways.
We are the ones who stand on the beaches holding back mining
from, from ruining the fishing
that all your communities also love.
It is outrageous that these sets of legislation go
to the heart of who we are as New Zealanders.
And you don't want to protect water
and you don't want to protect our oceans
and our fish and our birds.
The things that you all love so much.
And you have said that Maori are the issue.
One of the biggest issues
around why councils are inefficient at the moment is the
gross underfunding of councils to enable them to do the job
that they need to do in a way
that reflects a honorable Trudy partnership.
So I'll leave that there in case there are any questions,
but thank you for listening.
Yeah, no, thank you for, um,
your insights and, and your passion.
Um, and that's submission.
Uh, Rachel has a question and we've got hoa
and then we'll have to wrap it up
'cause we are nearly at time.
Thank you. And the, the uses,
not everyone on this committee, hopefully, you know that.
Um, I'm interested in your comments about the,
um, equivalence in the treaty settlements.
Yes. Because there's no equivalent of part two mm-hmm.
Six A and seven A and eight then actors cannot work.
Uh, do you,
and we had the labor's, um,
natural built environments at which had an equivalent
of part two in there and more.
Um, but there was still this concern about the settlements
regardless of having that equivalence of part two.
Do you think, um, that that process could work?
Like, like can, can the re a be changed?
Um, and admittedly with some process for treaty settlements?
Is there a way through if there is this, as you say,
that part two equivalence?
Absolutely. And yes, we had the same concerns
that under labor, but what we have now is like,
think of it like a plug.
So you've gotta plug that square holes
and the treaty settlements around,
so they just don't actually fit.
But you can create a set of resource management laws
that enable upholding truly settlements
and more importantly, te
but also go to the fact that some
of the things in the RMA didn't work.
And so I, I, myself, as a practitioner of the RMA
for 30 years know that things aren't working in the RMA,
but Maori are the issue.
And so the clear focus on
upholding settlements is the single, single point
that this set of legislation focuses on is, is frankly naive
around how complex Maori interests now go across this
country, both in the resource management space,
but also economically and socially.
But I absolutely think
that there can be an equivalent system that enables all
of those things to occur, but this isn't it.
Thank you. And, uh, Hua,
Um, this isn't a question, this is a mehi, uh,
to the education you have provided this committee, uh,
because there are so many points that you have, uh, shown us
that we need to listen
and really consider in terms of how we give effect to TE
and the diverse relationships
that Maori have across the resource management space.
So it is a mahi to the 28 generations.
It is the mahi to the biggest landowner
and rate payer in your district
and the way that you have articulated clearly the issues
with this current legislation
and how we can do better into the future.
So thank you Tina.
Thank, thank you, Ana.
And, uh, yeah, well good place to to wrap it up there.
So thank you Tina, for your submission today.
Appreciate your time kilda. So welcome.
Our next submitter, uh, Summerset.
Summerset. Good
Morning. Can you, can you hear me?
Yes, we can see you there. Aaron.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You've got 20 minutes with us, so we will hand over to you
for your opening remarks.
Uh, thank you very much. Uh, thank you for
allowing me to speak today.
I'm sorry I can't be there in person.
So I have been the chief development officer at Somerset
for about 10 years, but working in New Zealand for, um,
well since the RMA came into effect in 1991.
So, um, some, some lengthy experience
with the relevant planning instruments.
Uh, Somerset itself is, is one
of the largest retirement village developers,
and indeed one of the largest, uh, residential developers
of oftentimes, um, building more units than the largest
of the, of the resi developers.
We do strongly support these bills in the overall direction
of them, uh,
and it is going to make a system that's more enabling,
predictable, proportionate, and outcomes focused.
So, um, yes, we, we support this
and we also support the R VA's submission.
We saw that we agree with everything
that's in the RVA Retirement Villages
Associations submission.
Uh, these is a, this is a, a more technical, um,
submission than mine.
Uh, I'm not a planner per se.
I'm someone that's, that's trying to, um, oversee the,
the, the development side of things for Somerset.
There is a worsening shortage in an of, uh, housing
and care for the aging.
And we do comprehensive care retirement villages, which are,
uh, both independent living
and, um, rest home level care, um,
hospital level care even.
So we, we provide the full gamut.
So we are not, I guess one of the
most critical points in our submission
and that if the Retirement Villages Association is, is
that we are not just sort of, we shouldn't be lumped in
with general housing.
We think we are a specific case being retirement
village developers.
We think we are critical social infrastructure.
And so if you think about your priority on infrastructure,
we think we are a form of infrastructure that should get,
um, the same standing in the legislation.
Our experience is that the current system
is routinely delayed, made more expensive and constrained,
and it's due to the inconsistent
and restrictive plan provisions as they are at the moment.
Disproportionate third party participation, lengthy
and unpredictable plan change in consenting processes
and insufficient recognition
of the significant positive effects of retirement villages.
And two obvious positive effects of retirement villages are
that if for every unit we create, the the residents
that move into that unit are selling their family home.
And so if we create 300
new units in a retirement village, that frees up 300 homes
in the same area.
For, for, um, the general residential supply, if you like,
the second obvious benefit is that
we're a quasi sort of health facility.
And oftentimes when the aged, um, you know,
have specific needs or have an event, we deal with
that within our rest times rather than that person needing
to go to hospital and blocking beds.
So, um, we we're a, we're a significant part of the social
infrastructure fabric.
Again, there's a lot of, there's a lot of, uh,
technical information in the,
the Retirement Village Association submission.
Mm-hmm. And I presume, not speaking,
but if I can just speak for us, in in particular,
we would say that the goals of the planning bill
and the national environment Bill
natural environment bill must be sufficiently enabling of,
of, uh, housing for the older people.
So they should avoid language
that unintentionally elevates protection
outcomes above development.
For example, some of the goals, uh, could be tweaked
to make sure that the the right balance is achieved there.
Between environmental protection
and development goals, we support
that the bills reduce amenity driven barriers.
We, we see, for example, councils wanting to
step inside the village design
and design the, the units, the spaces,
the roads within a village that, that cannot be seen
from anywhere outside the bounds of the village.
And we've been doing this for 30 years,
and the people that are telling us
how they would rather have it designed have sometimes done
it for 30 minutes in, in university.
So we like the fact that the, um,
that this new set of legislation excludes, excludes effects,
um, which are not tied
to genuine external effects.
We'd like the national standards
and policy direction, um,
to include standardized definitions of,
of retirement villages.
We see different, different interpretations of,
of, and different rules relating
to retirement villages up and down the country.
And so this is an opportunity to standardize the definition
of retirement village, uh, in the national,
in the national framework.
It's really, it really will, um, make things more efficient
and less confusing for all.
We, we support that the, uh, the intention is
to limit public and targeted notification
and to limit the ability for third parties to appeal.
And, um, we like that affected persons, you know,
should be affected by more than minor external effects
for planning consents.
That's gonna, that's important to,
to rule out any, any non-relevant, um, parties,
uh, wishing to contribute to,
to consent processes, which really don't pertain to them.
Uh, we support the retention of a pathway
for private plan changes as our
development often depends on these tools to respond to gaps
and council planning and changing community needs.
And, um, we also think that the fast track
and alternative pathways are important.
It's critical that, uh, we remain eligible for fast track
or equivalent streamlined consenting processes,
and we support the ongoing use
of the fast track consenting regime alongside this,
these two pieces of legislation.
So, um, that's, that's, uh, that's it in a,
in essence and I'm be, uh, be pleased
to take any questions the committee might have.
Have.
Well, thank you very much Aaron, for that submission.
We have a question from Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks, chair. Uh, thanks Aaron for your submission.
Um, appreciate the, uh, the work that you do
as an organization and your
submissions to the committee today.
I wonder if you could give us some examples of the, I mean,
you obviously referenced quite frequently the cost
increases, you know, the constraints, consenting issues.
I wonder if you could give some examples of that, uh,
and some examples, not only just in one area,
but across New Zealand, the variations you encounter
with different councils, different district plans,
and also I'd love to hear, um,
the disproportionate third party appeal stuff
that we've heard, you know, from across New Zealand as well,
if you've got examples that help to make the case
for why change is necessary.
Yeah, if I start with the last one, so disproportionate,
um, third party appeals, um, we've seen,
we've seen sort of, uh, environmental interest groups,
for example, uh, um,
submitting on our, uh, proposals where they might be
hundreds of miles away from the actual, um, subject site.
So, um, that would be the,
that would be the closest example I give of that.
Um, in terms of the, the issues we've had
with the current legislation, uh,
one example would be the boycott farm, um,
retirement village where three quarters, um,
constructed now in lower heart took us, took us seven years
to, to get that consented through the various processes.
Seven years. Wow.
The last, the last, uh, the last bill we paid
just from the environment court, so to pay the,
the court fees and the et cetera,
I think was $300,000 just, just to the environment court.
And then you, you know, you add the, um, years of,
uh, consultant bills, lawyers bills onto that,
and it, you can easily spend a million dollars on a,
on a resource consent application.
Our experience is that, you know, we're, we're,
we're fortunate in that we have the resources
and the willpower to commit to that,
but honestly, having sort of overseen the construction of 30
of these now once it's, once we're there, once we're built,
once we are operating within the
community, the neighbors are fine.
Like we're we're benign neighbors doing good work
and very respectful.
So yeah, it's, it's, it's important
that people get, get to have their say, uh,
at the right level at the right time.
But, um, you know, that, that sort of demonstrates,
uh, the,
Yeah. Thanks Aaron. Look, just
a quick step on that.
Um, how many rooms
or units was that hut example you're talking about now
that's probably gonna cost you a million dollars.
'cause I'm trying to just get an understanding of
that million dollars is gonna be passed on to those units.
Yeah. Uh, something like 180 independent units
and 80 sort of rest home units.
So 250 ish.
Yeah. Thank you. Well, that's, um, yeah, a lot.
And I kind of had a supplementary on that,
and it's similar questions just looking at the overall
impact of the current system on, I suppose the, the slowness
and the cost that you're facing.
Have you quantified that at all in terms of the,
the overall cost and time?
Um, you know, that the, the current RMA system has been
having that impact on, you know, retirement village sector?
Um, it, it is literally millions of dollars
per year that we, that we have holding costs
and, you know, while we're waiting for,
to get the green light on a development, not millions
of dollars per year on an individual site,
but if you have three or four
that are being delayed concurrently, the cost of capital
is such that you, we would be, we would be spending millions
of dollars a year and,
and waiting, just waiting to go through the processes.
And I suppose because, you know, there's also, um,
another, you know, social health impact here as well
because, um, I suppose with your retirement villages,
ultimately you are also able to take some of that
pressure off the public system.
Uh, you know, that's obviously quite significant if it's
taking seven years to even get a consent to start
building a facility, which could be
absolutely taking pressure off the health system
A hundred percent. Uh,
that, that's exactly the case.
There's a shortage of, um,
aged care facilities nationally
and, you know, so they, people are either, um,
struggling away in their own homes for too long,
or as I mentioned earlier, bed blocking the, um,
the national hospital system
Because you gave the lower heart example,
but there's obviously plenty others across the
country as well.
Uh, you know, where you've, you've struggled
with the current RMA system.
Yeah. Um, uh, Ryan asked for, for comment
for examples where inconsistency might be applied.
Well, just in the, um, subjectivity
of defining what a natural wetland is.
So, you know, at a, at our, at our site in Roo,
which is largely farmland, got some, you know, there's some
low points that have got some grasses in it.
And honestly, ecologists can stand there.
Highly trained ecologists can stand there looking at it and,
and have different, different views on how natural,
uh, wetland can be, even if it has obviously been sort
of created by farmers or whatever.
And, um, and
therefore greater Wellington Regional Council, uh,
is probably a, a party that we've, we've, you know,
experienced inconsistencies with,
but the definition of a, of a small wetland
and how natural that is held up that, uh,
that village probably by at least a year as we, as we spent
hundreds of thousands of dollars on different ecology views
And 'cause how concerning too is that with, I suppose,
an aging population as well.
I mean, I come from an area, Hawke's Bay, which has, uh,
you know, quite a increasing, um, uh, aging population.
So I suppose, uh, you know, the fact
that we are being restricted in terms of some
of this development to cater for
that aging population must be a a, a big concern.
It, it is a big concern.
Uh, we've, we're not only seeing our population age in, in
that the, there's a higher proportion of elderly people
and our population, but the absolute numbers
of older people are hitting a bit
of a bubble about now is the baby boomers all sort of hit
that 75, 80-year-old retirement age.
So there's two factors causing immense pressure on the need
to develop retirement villages.
Absolutely. Hey, thank you very much, Aaron.
Um, we appreciate your time today, um, and your submission.
Thank you very much. Thank you. Right.
We will now move through to our next submitter
who is also going to be joining us online,
and that is the Hawke's Bay Regional Council.
Good morning, can you hear us again?
Yes, we can. Welcome to the Select Committee this morning.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us.
We can see you all there from, uh, Hawkes Bay,
where I'm sure it's a slightly warmer than Wellington today.
Um, but look, we'll hand it over to you
for your opening remarks
and um, then we'll open it up for questions.
Thank you. Good morning to the committee.
Good morning to you. Chair weed.
Uh, no, you're not missing anything at home.
It's a miserable day. Uh, I'm Sophie Sears, chair
of Hawke's Bay Regional Council.
I'm with Katrina Brunton, who's our group manager of policy
and regulation, and Nicola Nicholson, who's our manager
of policy and planning between these two 40 years
of expertise in resource management at District, city
and regional council and central government,
and in the private sector, it's these two
and people like these across councils across New Zealand,
sorry, who will ensure the success of implementation
of the resource management reforms.
Before I hand it to them,
I just wanna really highlight quickly for the committee,
the enormous pressure space
and councils at the moment, there are four proposed bills
that we are dealing with, simplifying local government
rates, capping emergency management,
and this RM reform, the cumulative effect
of these is really significant to us.
All of these require attention and resourcing.
For example, the emergency management bill that Katrina
and I presented to last week, expect an extra $82 million
to be, um, provided for by councils to implement.
The uncertainty around how we are, are going
to implement them in the uncertainty
around regional councils is incredibly
disruptive to the organization.
We are spending time, attention, and resources submitting
and planning for changes across four reforms time
and attention that I just really wanna highlight will be
needed from this exact team for successful implementation
of the RN reforms.
And they are the most significant for this country's future.
So I wanted to highlight to the committee, please,
as you look through and listen to submissions, be aware
that the implementation is going to be compromised
by our attention and other areas as well.
So I'll hand straight to these experts. Thank you Chair.
Uh, thank you. Good morning panel.
My name is Katrina Brunton.
Uh, we have, uh, carefully reviewed the bills before you.
I am gonna do a bit of reading.
There is quite a lot of content.
Our submission was, uh, uh, lengthy, uh,
and included quite a lot of detail.
I'm gonna take some high level positions of that paper.
Uh, we definitely support the need to update
and modernize resource management, INO, New Zealand,
and we are keen to see the reform progressed and quickly.
Uh, however, for it to be, for the reform to succeed, uh,
it must be implemented in a way that is clear,
stable, and workable.
Uh, I'm going to set out some strategic context,
outline the system level issues we see as critical to
that system, uh, successful implementation.
And then I'll get Nicola
to talk some more technical elements.
Stability and the Hawke's Bay context.
In Hawkes Bay, we have spent more than 10 years progressing
what is commonly known as the tank plan change,
addressing water allocation
and quality in the Tonga plains, uh, uh,
an over allocated aquifer,
which is a significant horticultural
production area for the country.
During that time, we have worked under three different
versions of the National PO National Policy Statement
for freshwater, uh, 2014 2017,
and 2020.
Each iteration requiring significant rework for the council.
We are now at the final stage of that tank plan change.
Uh, and yet, and yet again,
reform has introduced more uncertainty.
At the same time, the prospect of
re-litigating the complex matters, uh, through plan changes,
hearings, environment court,
and potentially the high court creates further delay, cost,
and uncertainty for councils, communities,
and businesses alike.
Uh, this experience illustrate illustrates our central
message to today.
The system needs stability.
The introduction of the RMA in the 1990s promised
national consistency through standards,
but in practice that clarity was slow to materialize
with a 14 year gap between the first
and second policy statements
and a continual churn of changes and amendments.
Thereafter, the result has been duplication, delay,
uneven outcomes, and inconsistencies across regions.
We're asking government three things
to provide clear national direction, strong
and enforceable environmental standards,
and a sustained period.
Without structural change, without stability,
councils cannot effectively or efficiently deliver reform,
and communities cannot invest
and grow with confidence,
environmental limits and spatial planning.
HBRC absolutely supports spatial planning.
We support development,
but development development must occur within
environmental limits.
It is not separate from environmental constraint,
but rather shaped by it.
For that reason, environmental limits must sit at the front
end of spatial la uh, planning.
They cannot come after.
We strongly recommend that national direction on limits
and methods is issued early, that limits are mandatory
and not easily overridden,
and that environmental bottom lines are protected.
As spatial planning proceeds
before environmental limits are established,
councils will begin the planning
and then be required to retrofit limits thereafter,
resulting in duplication and consistency
and unnecessary expense.
Uh, for example,
and I think we, we think about environmental limits,
but one of those potentially, uh, regarding natural hazards,
we need to have those clarified upfront
before we begin to think about
what a spatial plan would look like.
This is not development versus environment,
it is development within environmental capacity,
uh, transition and consenting certainty.
We've also significant concerns regarding transition
and implementation sequencing.
There remains uncertainty about
how the proposed hybrid system from June, 2026 will operate
when the new framework will be fully enforced.
What this means for council resourcing
and consent holders seeking certainty, this is con
compounded across the country by the 2031 bow wave
of expired and expiring consents,
which will place substantial pressure on the system.
At the same time, reform is bidding in
so across the country.
All of these consents are going to need to be dealt
with at the same time.
And I beg there is not capacity in the country to do that.
Without clear timelines
and sequencing, councils cannot resource appropriately.
Consent holders will lack certainty
and costs will inevitably increase.
We strongly request the clear transition timeframes,
explicit implementation, sequencing,
and certainty about when obligations will shift.
In addition, the proposed registered permitted activity
framework will create administrative burden.
These activities provide private benefit
and the costs of administering them should not
fall on rate payers.
Actual and reasonable costs should be fully
recoverable from permit holders.
Costs should sit where the benefit lies.
Compliance standards and workforce capacity, stability
and certainty, again,
are particularly important in compliance and enforcement.
The speed and effectiveness of implementation
of the new system will depend heavily on the capability
that regional councils currently have in their
compliance functions.
Clear nationally,
consistent standards are fundamental to that capability.
Strong standards provide clarity for regulated parties,
support workforce confidence, reduce litigation risk,
and enable faster and more consistent implementation
at the higher end of enforcement, including prosecution,
consistency becomes critical.
Without it enforcement becomes uneven.
Legal risk increases and implementation slows.
If reform is to deliver durable outcomes, strong
and standardized national direction must sit alongside it.
I'm going to move now to governance certainty
and co-governance recognition in Hawke's Bay.
We are unique. We have the regional planning committee.
It is a statutory co-governance body established under its
own act and rooted in treaty settlement redress.
It holds shared decision making authority
for regional planning documents at the highest order being
the regional policy statement
or plans that fall there under the current bills,
do not clearly preserve this role
within the planning framework.
And while they signal intent to recognize arrangements,
they do not guarantee the committee's status
provide an equivalent role in regional spatial plans
and natural environment plans,
or ensure it's agreed decision making authority is
preserved from day one.
And I I understand completely the reforms have signaled a
two year timeframe for treaty arrangements to be sorted.
We don't have that luxury of time
given the implementation framework that we are being told.
We need to outline, uh,
that is outlined in the bill in terms
of spatial planning and environment plan.
We need that conversation upfront
before we begin those planning documents.
The RPC have made a submission to the select committee.
I implore the committee to please hear their submission in
person just as environmental limits must be clear
before spatial planning begins.
Governance arrangements must also be clear
before implementation starts.
Certainty about who holds decision making authority is
fundamental to stability.
Over to you. Lovely. Thank you.
Uh, so state of the environment
and reporting agility reform must also improve
how we measure and respond to environmental change.
Under the current system.
State of environment reporting has often been slow
and poorly integrated with planning.
This has limited our ability to respond quickly
to fresh water decline, coastal erosion, drought stress,
or flood risk, which has been exacerbated
by Schedule one processes.
The new system must enable more timely
and integrated monitoring frameworks that link directly
to environmental limits and inform agile decision making.
Faster, more responsive reporting strengthens
accountability, supports investment confidence,
and ensures the system can adjust to emerging pressures.
It's the old saying of you cannot manage
what you do not measure,
and you cannot provide certainty if information lags
onto regulatory relief.
Finally, regulatory relief provisions must be carefully
designed to avoid unintended consequences
while relief is intended to reduce unnecessary burden,
poorly bounded provisions, risks shifting
financial liability
and operational costs to councils without
safeguarding environmental integrity.
If relief mechanisms weaken protection
or transfer cost risk to local government,
we risk perverse outcomes
where long-term environmental outcomes are compromise due
to short-term financial pressure
relief must not undermine environmental bottom lines,
create uneven compliance or shift costs.
But in closing, Hawkes Bay Regional Council supports reform.
We want it to succeed and we are ready to implement it.
But success will depend on getting the foundations right.
That means early and clear national direction, certainty
and transition
and implementation, strong standardized consenting
and compliance frameworks, governance, clarity
and certainty, and ensuring costs sit
where the benefit lies.
If we provide stability
and clarity, now reform can deliver durable
and environmental protection
and enable confident, well located development
for generations to come.
Without that certainty, we risk repeating the cycle
of reform and rework
that has characterized the past decades.
We are ready to do the work.
We simply ask that the system we are asked
to implement is clear, stable, and workable from the outset.
Thank you, and we are happy to take any questions.
Thank you very much.
Look, I might jump in with the first question.
Um, look, you talk about the tank process, uh,
obviously I know the tank process really well
and it has been going on for a very long time.
Um, obviously a lot of cost, um, and, and time.
You, how would the current bills, um, in your understanding
and analysis improve this particular process, do you think?
Uh, I'm gonna, I'll, I'll try and start,
but I'm gonna pass over to Nicola, who, uh,
absolutely has technical detail more than I do.
I think fundamentally we need to have a system that
ensures, uh, that a, a plan that's developed
by the community as tank was, uh,
and then heard by an independent decision panel
only has the ability to be appealed on points of law only.
Otherwise, you are simply debating decisions
that have already been made from so from the scratch,
from from the beginning.
And that's what we have seen with Tank again
and again in terms of the current bill, I think
that the environmental limits as proposed
and with the methodology, if that comes into play
as it's envisioned, then that would provide
a tighter scope on what the community, uh,
or submitters could appeal on.
So that would provide, uh,
a more streamlined, uh, approach.
I also think looking at the alternating alternative
consenting mechanisms prior
to reaching those limits would be an easier conversation
to have or at least provide certainty moving forward
for people in those areas. Yeah,
Yeah. Good. Great.
Um, look, LA Farm has got a question.
Koto, thank you so much
for your very comprehensive submission
and I sort of feel like I don't know where to start.
There's so many questions,
but I, I wanted to pick up, uh, particularly on your,
uh, points around clause 15
and the consideration of adverse effects on activities.
And you point out within that a lot of concerning aspects,
but the one that caught my attention was the division
of effects management between the two bills.
And I wanted to, um, I I I wondered if you wanted
to offer up just an explanation of those concerns,
particularly when it comes to the example that you gave of
a coastal discharge
where effects would be managed quite
confusingly under both bills.
You go, uh, it is confusing.
Uh, and I'm not sure that I've got enough time
to really dive into to that.
I think the point that we were trying
to make there was when we have this, uh, separation
between two bills and we can understand why, we need
to be really clear about who's responsible for what
and what area or else
what we will end up doing is having a more complicated
system, which is what this is trying to avoid, right?
Uh, and having to consider those adverse effects within the
two systems.
How do you then resolve the assessments between the two
of them if they don't necessarily agree?
So that was kind of the, the, the crux of
what we were trying to flag in that point.
Just just to follow up on that then,
because you've picked up and,
and made very clear how destabilizing
it currently is with essentially the reform
of local government going on
and all the uncertainty around that.
Can you help us understand, like as a regional council
yourself, what impact the, I guess the,
the cumulative impact of all this uncertainty?
And then this, you know, presumably we're gonna land on
some bills and you've clearly pointed out there's,
there's a lot of concern around the actual implication
and practical application of those.
What is the risk to the implementation of this?
And, you know, are we gonna make things worse
and do you think the bill is in a position
where we will actually be making things worse rather than
providing certainty?
Thank you for your question. I don't think the bill on its
own will make things worse.
I think it has the potential
to improve the system without a doubt.
Back to our submission about implementation of a new system,
you need us, you need the structures of government
and local government to be able to implement that
without constant disruption.
Mm-hmm. There is extensive capability
and capacity within the regional sector now to begin
to implement the RM reform
or the new reform, uh, uh, right now
provided, uh, we have those clear standards
provided we have the clear implementation frameworks,
but if at the same time you're then going to, uh,
have a massive restructure of local government, uh,
the administrative arm of central government, then we need
to be very clear about whose role it is to do what.
And so that's where we are imploring you for clarity, uh,
timeliness and stability.
Stability. Can I add to that the success
of this reform is in the implementation
and that requires attention, time,
and effort from the people that do that?
Well, what we are doing at the moment is spending an
enormous amount of time trying to understand
what governance structures will look like,
what rates capping will mean to the capacity of this team,
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
Mm-hmm. If the big prizes, the RN reform, we need
to push all the other pieces aside to focus time resources
and, uh, stability of governance
to make sure it can succeed.
That's our real point.
Thank you. Um, look, I'll just jump in with a couple of,
um, last questions.
Um, you talk about the data and systems
and more investment, um, you know, happening there.
Do you think that better data would've been, um, better
for the response, um, to Cyclone Gabrielle, for example,
and, um, you know, what we're facing in terms
of natural disasters?
In, in short, I'd say the answer is no.
I don't think, uh, it was a lack of data, uh, that, uh,
was responsible for any response failures.
Uh, when we talk about data
and governance, we're actually talking about planning data,
uh, for state of the environment, monitoring layers
for spatial planning, that type of monitoring data as well.
Yeah. Okay. So then, um, so just another quick question,
because we have heard quite a lot from, um,
horticulture New Zealand and the vegetable
growers, um, this morning.
Um, and mm-hmm. You know, raising concerns
around permitted activity
and over allocated, um, aquifers of course,
which are relevant to Hawke's Bay.
Um, what would be your response to that?
Because their concern was potentially
that the new system was actually, um, going
to cause some more compliance and, um, more, uh, time
and cost, um,
and compared to the old system, what,
what's your view on that?
Because obviously you will be the ones
responsible for the implementation
Ultimately. Um, thank
you. We, we don't know
what those permitted activities are currently, so
until we see those, uh, we don't know.
But what is become, uh, or what is apparent
and what is known is that a consent provide certainty,
and it's a, it's a certainty that you can take to the bank.
So when we are talking about over allocated aquifers, uh,
the one thing you can give growers is certainty
that they can take to the bank.
And currently, uh, they don't even have that.
We've, we are in an over allocated catchment.
We had absolutely, uh, debated our way
through the tank plan change and,
and the finishing line is in sight.
But now all those consents are on hold.
We've got a new system that talks potentially about options
or, um, comparative, comparative consenting.
And so that's a whole new, uh, element
that the growers are gonna have to grapple with.
Um, permitted activity
or permitted water takes have always been there
for stop drinking water or for human purposes.
Um, I, you know, I, I can't imagine
a government would produce a standard
that says taking water is a permitted activity,
but, uh, based on what we are reading in the bill,
it's saying in over allocated catchments
that will need to be managed.
Brilliant. Look, we are gonna have to leave it there
because, uh, we have, uh, gone well over time,
but we do appreciate your time today, um,
and yet your really thorough submission, um,
really insightful and, and useful
and valuable for us. So thank you very much.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
So, uh, that brings us to the end of our morning session,
um, for our hearings.
Uh, we are running a little bit behind time,
so we will resume at 1240.
Um, and we are going to break now
and we will see everyone back at 1240.
Good afternoon session, Stuart.
Um, yeah, otherwise it's just
not gonna be enough, but it's okay.
So will just run I'll, I'll get in touch.
Yeah, that's cool. Them on.